
<h2>Contents</h2>
<table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td><a href="#pref01" class="pginternal">PREFACE</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#pref02" class="pginternal">PROEM</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap01" class="pginternal">RUNE I. Birth of Wainamoinen</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap02" class="pginternal">RUNE II. Wainamoinen’s Sowing</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap03" class="pginternal">RUNE III. Wainamoinen and Youkahainen</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap04" class="pginternal">RUNE IV. The Fate of Aino</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap05" class="pginternal">RUNE V. Wainamoinen’s Lamentation</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap06" class="pginternal">RUNE VI. Wainamoinen’s Hapless Journey</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap07" class="pginternal">RUNE VII. Wainamoinen’s Rescue</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap08" class="pginternal">RUNE VIII. Maiden of the Rainbow</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap09" class="pginternal">RUNE IX. Origin of Iron</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap10" class="pginternal">RUNE X. Ilmarinen forges the Sampo</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap11" class="pginternal">RUNE XI. Lemminkainen’s Lament</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap12" class="pginternal">RUNE XII. Kyllikki’s Broken Vow</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap13" class="pginternal">RUNE XIII. Lemminkainen’s Second Wooing</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap14" class="pginternal">RUNE XIV. Death of Lemminkainen</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap15" class="pginternal">RUNE XV. Lemminkainen’s Restoration</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap16" class="pginternal">RUNE XVI. Wainainoinen’s Boat-building</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap17" class="pginternal">RUNE XVII. Wainamoinen finds the Lost Word</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap18" class="pginternal">RUNE XVIII. The Rival Suitors</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap19" class="pginternal">RUNE XIX. Ilmarinen’s Wooing</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap20" class="pginternal">RUNE XX. The Brewing of Beer</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap21" class="pginternal">RUNE XXI. Ilmarinen’s Wedding-feast</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap22" class="pginternal">RUNE XXII. The Bride’s Farewell</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap23" class="pginternal">RUNE XXIII. Osmotar, the Bride-adviser</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap24" class="pginternal">RUNE XXIV. The Bride’s Farewell</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap25" class="pginternal">RUNE XXV. Wainamoinen’s Wedding-songs</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap26" class="pginternal">RUNE XXVI. Origin of the Serpent</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap27" class="pginternal">RUNE XXVII. The Unwelcome Guest</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap28" class="pginternal">RUNE XXVIII. The Mother’s Counsel</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap29" class="pginternal">RUNE XXIX. The Isle of Refuge</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap30" class="pginternal">RUNE XXX. The Frost-fiend</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap31" class="pginternal">RUNE XXXI. Kullerwoinen, Son of Evil</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap32" class="pginternal">RUNE XXXII. Kullervo as a Shepherd</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap33" class="pginternal">RUNE XXXIII. Kullervo and the Cheat-cake</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap34" class="pginternal">RUNE XXXIV. Kullervo finds his Tribe-folk</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap35" class="pginternal">RUNE XXXV. Kullervo’s Evil Deeds</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap36" class="pginternal">RUNE XXXVI. Kullerwoinen’s Victory and Death</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap37" class="pginternal">RUNE XXXVII. Ilmarinen’s Bride of Gold</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap38" class="pginternal">RUNE XXXVIII. Ilmarinen’s Fruitless Wooing</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap39" class="pginternal">RUNE XXXIX. Wainamoinen’s Sailing</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap40" class="pginternal">RUNE XL. Birth of the Harp</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap41" class="pginternal">RUNE XLI. Wainamoinen’s Harp-songs</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap42" class="pginternal">RUNE XLII. Capture of the Sampo</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap43" class="pginternal">RUNE XLIII. The Sampo lost in the Sea</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap44" class="pginternal">RUNE XLIV. Birth of the Second Harp</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap45" class="pginternal">RUNE XLV. Birth of the Nine Diseases</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap46" class="pginternal">RUNE XLVI. Otso the Honey-eater</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap47" class="pginternal">RUNE XLVII. Louhi steals Sun, Moon, and Fire</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap48" class="pginternal">RUNE XLVIII. Capture of the Fire-fish</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap49" class="pginternal">RUNE XLIX. Restoration of the Sun and Moon</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap50" class="pginternal">RUNE L. Mariatta—Wainamoinen’s Departure</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap51" class="pginternal">EPILOGUE</a></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td><a href="#chap52" class="pginternal">GLOSSARY</a></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="pref02"/>PROEM</h2>
<p class="noindent">Mastered by desire impulsive,<br/>
By a mighty inward urging,<br/>
I am ready now for singing,<br/>
Ready to begin the chanting<br/>
Of our nation’s ancient folk-song<br/>
Handed down from by-gone ages.<br/>
In my mouth the words are melting,<br/>
From my lips the tones are gliding,<br/>
From my tongue they wish to hasten;<br/>
When my willing teeth are parted,<br/>
When my ready mouth is opened,<br/>
Songs of ancient wit and wisdom<br/>
Hasten from me not unwilling.</p>
<p>Golden friend, and dearest brother,<br/>
Brother dear of mine in childhood,<br/>
Come and sing with me the stories,<br/>
Come and chant with me the legends,<br/>
Legends of the times forgotten,<br/>
Since we now are here together,<br/>
Come together from our roamings.<br/>
Seldom do we come for singing,<br/>
Seldom to the one, the other,<br/>
O’er this cold and cruel country,<br/>
O’er the poor soil of the Northland.<br/>
Let us clasp our hands together<br/>
That we thus may best remember.<br/>
Join we now in merry singing,<br/>
Chant we now the oldest folk-lore,<br/>
That the dear ones all may hear them,<br/>
That the well-inclined may hear them,<br/>
Of this rising generation.<br/>
These are words in childhood taught me,<br/>
Songs preserved from distant ages,<br/>
Legends they that once were taken<br/>
From the belt of Wainamoinen,<br/>
From the forge of Ilmarinen,<br/>
From the sword of Kaukomieli,<br/>
From the bow of Youkahainen,<br/>
From the pastures of the Northland,<br/>
From the meads of Kalevala.<br/>
These my dear old father sang me<br/>
When at work with knife and hatchet<br/>
These my tender mother taught me<br/>
When she twirled the flying spindle,<br/>
When a child upon the matting<br/>
By her feet I rolled and tumbled.</p>
<p>Incantations were not wanting<br/>
Over Sampo and o’er Louhi,<br/>
Sampo growing old in singing,<br/>
Louhi ceasing her enchantment.<br/>
In the songs died wise Wipunen,<br/>
At the games died Lemminkainen.<br/>
There are many other legends,<br/>
Incantations that were taught me,<br/>
That I found along the wayside,<br/>
Gathered in the fragrant copses,<br/>
Blown me from the forest branches,<br/>
Culled among the plumes of pine-trees,<br/>
Scented from the vines and flowers,<br/>
Whispered to me as I followed<br/>
Flocks in land of honeyed meadows,<br/>
Over hillocks green and golden,<br/>
After sable-haired Murikki,<br/>
And the many-colored Kimmo.<br/>
Many runes the cold has told me,<br/>
Many lays the rain has brought me,<br/>
Other songs the winds have sung me;<br/>
Many birds from many forests,<br/>
Oft have sung me lays n concord<br/>
Waves of sea, and ocean billows,<br/>
Music from the many waters,<br/>
Music from the whole creation,<br/>
Oft have been my guide and master.<br/>
Sentences the trees created,<br/>
Rolled together into bundles,<br/>
Moved them to my ancient dwelling,<br/>
On the sledges to my cottage,<br/>
Tied them to my garret rafters,<br/>
Hung them on my dwelling-portals,<br/>
Laid them in a chest of boxes,<br/>
Boxes lined with shining copper.<br/>
Long they lay within my dwelling<br/>
Through the chilling winds of winter,<br/>
In my dwelling-place for ages.</p>
<p>Shall I bring these songs together<br/>
From the cold and frost collect them?<br/>
Shall I bring this nest of boxes,<br/>
Keepers of these golden legends,<br/>
To the table in my cabin,<br/>
Underneath the painted rafters,<br/>
In this house renowned and ancient?<br/>
Shall I now these boxes open,<br/>
Boxes filled with wondrous stories?<br/>
Shall I now the end unfasten<br/>
Of this ball of ancient wisdom,<br/>
These ancestral lays unravel?<br/>
Let me sing an old-time legend,<br/>
That shall echo forth the praises<br/>
Of the beer that I have tasted,<br/>
Of the sparkling beer of barley.<br/>
Bring to me a foaming goblet<br/>
Of the barley of my fathers,<br/>
Lest my singing grow too weary,<br/>
Singing from the water only.<br/>
Bring me too a cup of strong-beer,<br/>
It will add to our enchantment,<br/>
To the pleasure of the evening,<br/>
Northland’s long and dreary evening,<br/>
For the beauty of the day-dawn,<br/>
For the pleasure of the morning,<br/>
The beginning of the new-day.</p>
<p>Often I have heard them chanting,<br/>
Often I have heard them singing,<br/>
That the nights come to us singly,<br/>
That the Moon beams on us singly,<br/>
That the Sun shines on us singly;<br/>
Singly also, Wainamoinen,<br/>
The renowned and wise enchanter,<br/>
Born from everlasting Ether<br/>
Of his mother, Ether’s daughter.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap01"/>RUNE I.<br/>
BIRTH OF WAINAMOINEN.</h2>
<p>In primeval times, a maiden,<br/>
Beauteous Daughter of the Ether,<br/>
Passed for ages her existence<br/>
In the great expanse of heaven,<br/>
O’er the prairies yet enfolded.<br/>
Wearisome the maiden growing,<br/>
Her existence sad and hopeless,<br/>
Thus alone to live for ages<br/>
In the infinite expanses<br/>
Of the air above the sea-foam,<br/>
In the far outstretching spaces,<br/>
In a solitude of ether,<br/>
She descended to the ocean,<br/>
Waves her coach, and waves her pillow.<br/>
Thereupon the rising storm-wind<br/>
Flying from the East in fierceness,<br/>
Whips the ocean into surges,<br/>
Strikes the stars with sprays of ocean<br/>
Till the waves are white with fervor.<br/>
To and fro they toss the maiden,<br/>
Storm-encircled, hapless maiden;<br/>
With her sport the rolling billows,<br/>
With her play the storm-wind forces,<br/>
On the blue back of the waters;<br/>
On the white-wreathed waves of ocean,<br/>
Play the forces of the salt-sea,<br/>
With the lone and helpless maiden;<br/>
Till at last in full conception,<br/>
Union now of force and beauty,<br/>
Sink the storm-winds into slumber;<br/>
Overburdened now the maiden<br/>
Cannot rise above the surface;<br/>
Seven hundred years she wandered,<br/>
Ages nine of man’s existence,<br/>
Swam the ocean hither, thither,<br/>
Could not rise above the waters,<br/>
Conscious only of her travail;<br/>
Seven hundred years she labored<br/>
Ere her first-born was delivered.<br/>
Thus she swam as water-mother,<br/>
Toward the east, and also southward,<br/>
Toward the west, and also northward;<br/>
Swam the sea in all directions,<br/>
Frightened at the strife of storm-winds,<br/>
Swam in travail, swam unceasing,<br/>
Ere her first-born was delivered.<br/>
Then began she gently weeping,<br/>
Spake these measures, heavy-hearted:<br/>
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!<br/>
Woe is me, in this my travail!<br/>
Into what have I now fallen?<br/>
Woe is me, that I unhappy,<br/>
Left my home in subtle ether,<br/>
Came to dwell amid the sea-foam,<br/>
To be tossed by rolling billows,<br/>
To be rocked by winds and waters,<br/>
On the far outstretching waters,<br/>
In the salt-sea’s vast expanses,<br/>
Knowing only pain and trouble!<br/>
Better far for me, O Ukko!<br/>
Were I maiden in the Ether,<br/>
Than within these ocean-spaces,<br/>
To become a water-mother!<br/>
All this life is cold and dreary,<br/>
Painful here is every motion,<br/>
As I linger in the waters,<br/>
As I wander through the ocean.<br/>
Ukko, thou O God, up yonder,<br/>
Thou the ruler of the heavens,<br/>
Come thou hither, thou art needed,<br/>
Come thou hither, I implore thee,<br/>
To deliver me from trouble,<br/>
To deliver me in travail.<br/>
Come I pray thee, hither hasten,<br/>
Hasten more that thou art needed,<br/>
Haste and help this helpless maiden!”<br/>
When she ceased her supplications,<br/>
Scarce a moment onward passes,<br/>
Ere a beauteous duck descending,<br/>
Hastens toward the water-mother,<br/>
Comes a-flying hither, thither,<br/>
Seeks herself a place for nesting.<br/>
Flies she eastward, flies she westward,<br/>
Circles northward, circles southward,<br/>
Cannot find a grassy hillock,<br/>
Not the smallest bit of verdure;<br/>
Cannot find a spot protected,<br/>
Cannot find a place befitting,<br/>
Where to make her nest in safety.<br/>
Flying slowly, looking round her,<br/>
She descries no place for resting,<br/>
Thinking loud and long debating,<br/>
And her words are such as follow:<br/>
“Build I in the winds my dwelling,<br/>
On the floods my place of nesting?<br/>
Surely would the winds destroy it,<br/>
Far away the waves would wash it.”<br/>
Then the daughter of the Ether,<br/>
Now the hapless water-mother,<br/>
Raised her shoulders out of water,<br/>
Raised her knees above the ocean,<br/>
That the duck might build her dwelling,<br/>
Build her nesting-place in safety.<br/>
Thereupon the duck in beauty,<br/>
Flying slowly, looking round her,<br/>
Spies the shoulders of the maiden,<br/>
Sees the knees of Ether’s daughter,<br/>
Now the hapless water-mother,<br/>
Thinks them to be grassy hillocks,<br/>
On the blue back of the ocean.<br/>
Thence she flies and hovers slowly,<br/>
Lightly on the knee she settles,<br/>
Finds a nesting-place befitting,<br/>
Where to lay her eggs in safety.<br/>
Here she builds her humble dwelling,<br/>
Lays her eggs within, at pleasure,<br/>
Six, the golden eggs she lays there,<br/>
Then a seventh, an egg of iron;<br/>
Sits upon her eggs to hatch them,<br/>
Quickly warms them on the knee-cap<br/>
Of the hapless water-mother;<br/>
Hatches one day, then a second,<br/>
Then a third day sits and hatches.<br/>
Warmer grows the water round her,<br/>
Warmer is her bed in ocean,<br/>
While her knee with fire is kindled,<br/>
And her shoulders too are burning,<br/>
Fire in every vein is coursing.<br/>
Quick the maiden moves her shoulders,<br/>
Shakes her members in succession,<br/>
Shakes the nest from its foundation,<br/>
And the eggs fall into ocean,<br/>
Dash in pieces on the bottom<br/>
Of the deep and boundless waters.<br/>
In the sand they do not perish,<br/>
Not the pieces in the ocean;<br/>
But transformed, in wondrous beauty<br/>
All the fragments come together<br/>
Forming pieces two in number,<br/>
One the upper, one the lower,<br/>
Equal to the one, the other.<br/>
From one half the egg, the lower,<br/>
Grows the nether vault of Terra:<br/>
From the upper half remaining,<br/>
Grows the upper vault of Heaven;<br/>
From the white part come the moonbeams,<br/>
From the yellow part the sunshine,<br/>
From the motley part the starlight,<br/>
From the dark part grows the cloudage;<br/>
And the days speed onward swiftly,<br/>
Quickly do the years fly over,<br/>
From the shining of the new sun<br/>
From the lighting of the full moon.<br/>
Still the daughter of the Ether,<br/>
Swims the sea as water-mother,<br/>
With the floods outstretched before her,<br/>
And behind her sky and ocean.<br/>
Finally about the ninth year,<br/>
In the summer of the tenth year,<br/>
Lifts her head above the surface,<br/>
Lifts her forehead from the waters,<br/>
And begins at last her workings,<br/>
Now commences her creations,<br/>
On the azure water-ridges,<br/>
On the mighty waste before her.<br/>
Where her hand she turned in water,<br/>
There arose a fertile hillock;<br/>
Wheresoe’er her foot she rested,<br/>
There she made a hole for fishes;<br/>
Where she dived beneath the waters,<br/>
Fell the many deeps of ocean;<br/>
Where upon her side she turned her,<br/>
There the level banks have risen;<br/>
Where her head was pointed landward,<br/>
There appeared wide bays and inlets;<br/>
When from shore she swam a distance,<br/>
And upon her back she rested,<br/>
There the rocks she made and fashioned,<br/>
And the hidden reefs created,<br/>
Where the ships are wrecked so often,<br/>
Where so many lives have perished.<br/>
Thus created were the islands,<br/>
Rocks were fastened in the ocean,<br/>
Pillars of the sky were planted,<br/>
Fields and forests were created,<br/>
Checkered stones of many colors,<br/>
Gleaming in the silver sunlight,<br/>
All the rocks stood well established;<br/>
But the singer, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Had not yet beheld the sunshine,<br/>
Had not seen the golden moonlight,<br/>
Still remaining undelivered.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Lingering within his dungeon<br/>
Thirty summers altogether,<br/>
And of winters, also thirty,<br/>
Peaceful on the waste of waters,<br/>
On the broad-sea’s yielding bosom,<br/>
Well reflected, long considered,<br/>
How unborn to live and flourish<br/>
In the spaces wrapped in darkness,<br/>
In uncomfortable limits,<br/>
Where he had not seen the moonlight,<br/>
Had not seen the silver sunshine.<br/>
Thereupon these words be uttered,<br/>
Let himself be heard in this wise:<br/>
“Take, O Moon, I pray thee, take me,<br/>
Take me, thou, O Sun above me,<br/>
Take me, thou O Bear of heaven,<br/>
From this dark and dreary prison,<br/>
From these unbefitting portals,<br/>
From this narrow place of resting,<br/>
From this dark and gloomy dwelling,<br/>
Hence to wander from the ocean,<br/>
Hence to walk upon the islands,<br/>
On the dry land walk and wander,<br/>
Like an ancient hero wander,<br/>
Walk in open air and breathe it,<br/>
Thus to see the moon at evening,<br/>
Thus to see the silver sunlight,<br/>
Thus to see the Bear in heaven,<br/>
That the stars I may consider.”<br/>
Since the Moon refused to free him,<br/>
And the Sun would not deliver,<br/>
Nor the Great Bear give assistance,<br/>
His existence growing weary,<br/>
And his life but an annoyance,<br/>
Bursts he then the outer portals<br/>
Of his dark and dismal fortress;<br/>
With his strong, but unnamed finger,<br/>
Opens he the lock resisting;<br/>
With the toes upon his left foot,<br/>
With the fingers of his right hand,<br/>
Creeps he through the yielding portals<br/>
To the threshold of his dwelling;<br/>
On his knees across the threshold,<br/>
Throws himself head foremost, forward<br/>
Plunges into deeps of ocean,<br/>
Plunges hither, plunges thither,<br/>
Turning with his hands the water;<br/>
Swims he northward, swims he southward,<br/>
Swims he eastward, swims he westward,<br/>
Studying his new surroundings.<br/>
Thus our hero reached the water,<br/>
Rested five years in the ocean,<br/>
Six long years, and even seven years,<br/>
Till the autumn of the eighth year,<br/>
When at last he leaves the waters,<br/>
Stops upon a promontory,<br/>
On a coast bereft of verdure;<br/>
On his knees he leaves the ocean,<br/>
On the land he plants his right foot,<br/>
On the solid ground his left foot,<br/>
Quickly turns his hands about him,<br/>
Stands erect to see the sunshine,<br/>
Stands to see the golden moonlight,<br/>
That he may behold the Great Bear,<br/>
That he may the stars consider.<br/>
Thus our hero, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Thus the wonderful enchanter<br/>
Was delivered from his mother,<br/>
Ilmatar, the Ether’s daughter.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap02"/>RUNE II.<br/>
WAINAMOINEN’S SOWING.</h2>
<p>Then arose old Wainamoinen,<br/>
With his feet upon the island,<br/>
On the island washed by ocean,<br/>
Broad expanse devoid of verdure;<br/>
There remained be many summers,<br/>
There he lived as many winters,<br/>
On the island vast and vacant,<br/>
well considered, long reflected,<br/>
Who for him should sow the island,<br/>
Who for him the seeds should scatter;<br/>
Thought at last of Pellerwoinen,<br/>
First-born of the plains and prairies,<br/>
When a slender boy, called Sampsa,<br/>
Who should sow the vacant island,<br/>
Who the forest seeds should scatter.<br/>
Pellerwoinen, thus consenting,<br/>
Sows with diligence the island,<br/>
Seeds upon the lands he scatters,<br/>
Seeds in every swamp and lowland,<br/>
Forest seeds upon the loose earth,<br/>
On the firm soil sows the acorns,<br/>
Fir-trees sows he on the mountains,<br/>
Pine-trees also on the hill-tops,<br/>
Many shrubs in every valley,<br/>
Birches sows he in the marshes,<br/>
In the loose soil sows the alders,<br/>
In the lowlands sows the lindens,<br/>
In the moist earth sows the willow,<br/>
Mountain-ash in virgin places,<br/>
On the banks of streams the hawthorn,<br/>
Junipers in hilly regions;<br/>
This the work of Pellerwoinen,<br/>
Slender Sampsa, in his childhood.<br/>
Soon the fertile seeds were sprouting,<br/>
Soon the forest trees were growing,<br/>
Soon appeared the tops of fir-trees,<br/>
And the pines were far outspreading;<br/>
Birches rose from all the marshes,<br/>
In the loose soil grew the alders,<br/>
In the mellow soil the lindens;<br/>
Junipers were also growing,<br/>
Junipers with clustered berries,<br/>
Berries on the hawthorn branches.<br/>
Now the hero, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Stands aloft to look about him,<br/>
How the Sampsa-seeds are growing,<br/>
How the crop of Pellerwoinen;<br/>
Sees the young trees thickly spreading,<br/>
Sees the forest rise in beauty;<br/>
But the oak-tree has not sprouted,<br/>
Tree of heaven is not growing,<br/>
Still within the acorn sleeping,<br/>
Its own happiness enjoying.<br/>
Then he waited three nights longer,<br/>
And as many days he waited,<br/>
Waited till a week had vanished,<br/>
Then again the work examined;<br/>
But the oak-tree was not growing,<br/>
Had not left her acorn-dwelling.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient hero,<br/>
Spies four maidens in the distance,<br/>
Water-brides, he spies a fifth-one,<br/>
On the soft and sandy sea-shore,<br/>
In the dewy grass and flowers,<br/>
On a point extending seaward,<br/>
Near the forests of the island.<br/>
Some were mowing, some were raking,<br/>
Raking what was mown together,<br/>
In a windrow on the meadow.<br/>
From the ocean rose a giant,<br/>
Mighty Tursas, tall and hardy,<br/>
Pressed compactly all the grasses,<br/>
That the maidens had been raking,<br/>
When a fire within them kindles,<br/>
And the flames shot up to heaven,<br/>
Till the windrows burned to ashes,<br/>
Only ashes now remaining<br/>
Of the grasses raked together.<br/>
In the ashes of the windrows,<br/>
Tender leaves the giant places,<br/>
In the leaves he plants an acorn,<br/>
From the acorn, quickly sprouting,<br/>
Grows the oak-tree, tall and stately,<br/>
From the ground enriched by ashes,<br/>
Newly raked by water-maidens;<br/>
Spread the oak-tree’s many branches,<br/>
Rounds itself a broad corona,<br/>
Raises it above the storm-clouds;<br/>
Far it stretches out its branches,<br/>
Stops the white-clouds in their courses,<br/>
With its branches hides the sunlight,<br/>
With its many leaves, the moonbeams,<br/>
And the starlight dies in heaven.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Thought awhile, and well considered,<br/>
How to kill the mighty oak-tree,<br/>
First created for his pleasure,<br/>
How to fell the tree majestic,<br/>
How to lop its hundred branches.<br/>
Sad the lives of man and hero,<br/>
Sad the homes of ocean-dwellers,<br/>
If the sun shines not upon them,<br/>
If the moonlight does not cheer them<br/>
Is there not some mighty hero,<br/>
Was there never born a giant,<br/>
That can fell the mighty oak-tree,<br/>
That can lop its hundred branches?<br/>
Wainamoinen, deeply thinking,<br/>
Spake these words soliloquizing:<br/>
“Kape, daughter of the Ether,<br/>
Ancient mother of my being,<br/>
Luonnotar, my nurse and helper,<br/>
Loan to me the water-forces,<br/>
Great the powers of the waters;<br/>
Loan to me the strength of oceans,<br/>
To upset this mighty oak-tree,<br/>
To uproot this tree of evil,<br/>
That again may shine the sunlight,<br/>
That the moon once more may glimmer.”<br/>
Straightway rose a form from oceans,<br/>
Rose a hero from the waters,<br/>
Nor belonged he to the largest,<br/>
Nor belonged he to the smallest,<br/>
Long was he as man’s forefinger,<br/>
Taller than the hand of woman;<br/>
On his head a cap of copper,<br/>
Boots upon his feet were copper,<br/>
Gloves upon his hands were copper,<br/>
And its stripes were copper-colored,<br/>
Belt around him made of copper,<br/>
Hatchet in his belt was copper;<br/>
And the handle of his hatchet<br/>
Was as long as hand of woman,<br/>
Of a finger’s breadth the blade was.<br/>
Then the trusty Wainamoinen<br/>
Thought awhile and well considered,<br/>
And his measures are as follow:<br/>
“Art thou, sir, divine or human?<br/>
Which of these thou only knowest;<br/>
Tell me what thy name and station.<br/>
Very like a man thou lookest,<br/>
Hast the bearing of a hero,<br/>
Though the length of man’s first finger,<br/>
Scarce as tall as hoof of reindeer.”<br/>
Then again spake Wainamoinen<br/>
To the form from out the ocean:<br/>
“Verily I think thee human,<br/>
Of the race of pigmy-heroes,<br/>
Might as well be dead or dying,<br/>
Fit for nothing but to perish.”<br/>
Answered thus the pigmy-hero,<br/>
Spake the small one from the ocean<br/>
To the valiant Wainamoinen<br/>
“Truly am I god and hero,<br/>
From the tribes that rule the ocean;<br/>
Come I here to fell the oak-tree,<br/>
Lop its branches with my hatchet.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Answers thus the sea-born hero:<br/>
“Never hast thou force sufficient,<br/>
Not to thee has strength been given,<br/>
To uproot this mighty oak-tree,<br/>
To upset this thing of evil,<br/>
Nor to lop its hundred branches.”<br/>
Scarcely had he finished speaking,<br/>
Scarcely had he moved his eyelids,<br/>
Ere the pigmy full unfolding,<br/>
Quick becomes a mighty giant.<br/>
With one step he leaves the ocean,<br/>
Plants himself, a mighty hero,<br/>
On the forest-fields surrounding;<br/>
With his head the clouds he pierces,<br/>
To his knees his beard extending,<br/>
And his locks fall to his ankles;<br/>
Far apart appear his eyeballs,<br/>
Far apart his feet are stationed.<br/>
Farther still his mighty shoulders.<br/>
Now begins his axe to sharpen,<br/>
Quickly to an edge he whets it,<br/>
Using six hard blocks of sandstone,<br/>
And of softer whetstones, seven.<br/>
Straightway to the oak-tree turning,<br/>
Thither stalks the mighty giant,<br/>
In his raiment long and roomy,<br/>
Flapping in the winds of heaven;<br/>
With his second step he totters<br/>
On the land of darker color;<br/>
With his third stop firmly planted,<br/>
Reaches he the oak-tree’s branches,<br/>
Strikes the trunk with sharpened hatchet,<br/>
With one mighty swing he strikes it,<br/>
With a second blow he cuts it;<br/>
As his blade descends the third time,<br/>
From his axe the sparks fly upward,<br/>
From the oak-tree fire outshooting;<br/>
Ere the axe descends a fourth time,<br/>
Yields the oak with hundred branches,<br/>
Shaking earth and heaven in falling.<br/>
Eastward far the trunk extending,<br/>
Far to westward flew the tree-tops,<br/>
To the South the leaves were scattered,<br/>
To the North its hundred branches.<br/>
Whosoe’er a branch has taken,<br/>
Has obtained eternal welfare;<br/>
Who secures himself a tree-top,<br/>
He has gained the master magic;<br/>
Who the foliage has gathered,<br/>
Has delight that never ceases.<br/>
Of the chips some had been scattered,<br/>
Scattered also many splinters,<br/>
On the blue back of the ocean,<br/>
Of the ocean smooth and mirrored,<br/>
Rocked there by the winds and waters,<br/>
Like a boat upon the billows;<br/>
Storm-winds blew them to the Northland,<br/>
Some the ocean currents carried.<br/>
Northland’s fair and slender maiden,<br/>
Washing on the shore a head-dress,<br/>
Beating on the rocks her garments,<br/>
Rinsing there her silken raiment,<br/>
In the waters of Pohyola,<br/>
There beheld the chips and splinters,<br/>
Carried by the winds and waters.<br/>
In a bag the chips she gathered,<br/>
Took them to the ancient court-yard,<br/>
There to make enchanted arrows,<br/>
Arrows for the great magician,<br/>
There to shape them into weapons,<br/>
Weapons for the skilful archer,<br/>
Since the mighty oak has fallen,<br/>
Now has lost its hundred branches,<br/>
That the North may see the sunshine,<br/>
See the gentle gleam of moonlight,<br/>
That the clouds may keep their courses,<br/>
May extend the vault of heaven<br/>
Over every lake and river,<br/>
O’er the banks of every island.<br/>
Groves arose in varied beauty,<br/>
Beautifully grew the forests,<br/>
And again, the vines and flowers.<br/>
Birds again sang in the tree-tops,<br/>
Noisily the merry thrushes,<br/>
And the cuckoos in the birch-trees;<br/>
On the mountains grew the berries,<br/>
Golden flowers in the meadows,<br/>
And the herbs of many colors,<br/>
Many kinds of vegetation;<br/>
But the barley is not growing.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Goes away and well considers,<br/>
By the borders of the waters,<br/>
On the ocean’s sandy margin,<br/>
Finds six seeds of golden barley,<br/>
Even seven ripened kernels,<br/>
On the shore of upper Northland,<br/>
In the sand upon the sea-shore,<br/>
Hides them in his trusty pouches,<br/>
Fashioned from the skin of squirrel,<br/>
Some were made from skin of marten;<br/>
Hastens forth the seeds to scatter,<br/>
Quickly sows the barley kernels,<br/>
On the brinks of Kalew-waters,<br/>
On the Osma-hills and lowlands.<br/>
Hark! the titmouse wildly crying,<br/>
From the aspen, words as follow:<br/>
“Osma’s barley will not flourish,<br/>
Not the barley of Wainola,<br/>
If the soil be not made ready,<br/>
If the forest be not levelled,<br/>
And the branches burned to ashes.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,<br/>
Made himself an axe for chopping,<br/>
Then began to clear the forest,<br/>
Then began the trees to level,<br/>
Felled the trees of all descriptions,<br/>
Only left the birch-tree standing<br/>
For the birds a place of resting,<br/>
Where might sing the sweet-voiced cuckoo,<br/>
Sacred bird in sacred branches.<br/>
Down from heaven came the eagle,<br/>
Through the air be came a-flying,<br/>
That he might this thing consider;<br/>
And he spake the words that follow:<br/>
“Wherefore, ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Hast thou left the slender birch-tree,<br/>
Left the birch-tree only standing?”<br/>
Wainamoinen thus made answer:<br/>
“Therefore is the birch left standing,<br/>
That the birds may liest within it,<br/>
That the eagle there may rest him,<br/>
There may sing the sacred cuckoo.”<br/>
Spake the eagle, thus replying:<br/>
Good indeed, thy hero-judgment,<br/>
That the birch-tree thou hast left us,<br/>
Left the sacred birch-tree standing,<br/>
As a resting-place for eagles,<br/>
And for birds of every feather,<br/>
Even I may rest upon it.”<br/>
Quickly then this bird of heaven,<br/>
Kindled fire among the branches;<br/>
Soon the flames are fanned by north-winds,<br/>
And the east-winds lend their forces,<br/>
Burn the trees of all descriptions,<br/>
Burn them all to dust and ashes,<br/>
Only is the birch left standing.<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,<br/>
Brings his magic grains of barley,<br/>
Brings he forth his seven seed-grains,<br/>
Brings them from his trusty pouches,<br/>
Fashioned from the skin of squirrel,<br/>
Some were made from skin of marten.<br/>
Thence to sow his seeds he hastens,<br/>
Hastes the barley-grains to scatter,<br/>
Speaks unto himself these measures:<br/>
“I the seeds of life am sowing,<br/>
Sowing through my open fingers,<br/>
From the hand of my Creator,<br/>
In this soil enriched with ashes,<br/>
In this soil to sprout and flourish.<br/>
Ancient mother, thou that livest<br/>
Far below the earth and ocean,<br/>
Mother of the fields and forests,<br/>
Bring the rich soil to producing,<br/>
Bring the seed-grains to the sprouting,<br/>
That the barley well may flourish.<br/>
Never will the earth unaided,<br/>
Yield the ripe nutritious barley;<br/>
Never will her force be wanting,<br/>
If the givers give assistance,<br/>
If the givers grace the sowing,<br/>
Grace the daughters of creation.<br/>
Rise, O earth, from out thy slumber,<br/>
From the slumber-land of ages,<br/>
Let the barley-grains be sprouting,<br/>
Let the blades themselves be starting,<br/>
Let the verdant stalks be rising,<br/>
Let the ears themselves be growing,<br/>
And a hundredfold producing,<br/>
From my plowing and my sowing,<br/>
From my skilled and honest labor.<br/>
Ukko, thou O God, up yonder,<br/>
Thou O Father of the heavens,<br/>
Thou that livest high in Ether,<br/>
Curbest all the clouds of heaven,<br/>
Holdest in the air thy counsel,<br/>
Holdest in the clouds good counsel,<br/>
From the East dispatch a cloudlet,<br/>
From the North-east send a rain-cloud,<br/>
From the West another send us,<br/>
From the North-west, still another,<br/>
Quickly from the South a warm-cloud,<br/>
That the rain may fall from heaven,<br/>
That the clouds may drop their honey,<br/>
That the ears may fill and ripen,<br/>
That the barley-fields may rustle.”<br/>
Thereupon benignant Ukko,<br/>
Ukko, father of the heavens,<br/>
Held his counsel in the cloud-space,<br/>
Held good counsel in the Ether;<br/>
From the East, he sent a cloudlet,<br/>
From the North-east, sent a rain-cloud,<br/>
From the West another sent he,<br/>
From the North-west, still another,<br/>
Quickly from the South a warm-cloud;<br/>
Joined in seams the clouds together,<br/>
Sewed together all their edges,<br/>
Grasped the cloud, and hurled it earthward.<br/>
Quick the rain-cloud drops her honey,<br/>
Quick the rain-drops fall from heaven,<br/>
That the ears may quickly ripen,<br/>
That the barley crop may rustle.<br/>
Straightway grow the seeds of barley,<br/>
From the germ the blade unfolding,<br/>
Richly colored ears arising,<br/>
From the rich soil of the fallow,<br/>
From the work of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Here a few days pass unnoted<br/>
And as many nights fly over.<br/>
When the seventh day had journeyed,<br/>
On the morning of the eighth day,<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,<br/>
Went to view his crop of barley,<br/>
How his plowing, how his sowing,<br/>
How his labors were resulting;<br/>
Found his crop of barley growing,<br/>
Found the blades were triple-knotted,<br/>
And the ears he found six-sided.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Turned his face, and looked about him,<br/>
Lo! there comes a spring-time cuckoo,<br/>
Spying out the slender birch-tree,<br/>
Rests upon it, sweetly singing:<br/>
“Wherefore is the silver birch-tree<br/>
Left unharmed of all the forest? “<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Therefore I have left the birch-tree,<br/>
Left the birch-tree only growing,<br/>
Home for thee for joyful singing.<br/>
Call thou here, O sweet-voiced cuckoo,<br/>
Sing thou here from throat of velvet,<br/>
Sing thou here with voice of silver,<br/>
Sing the cuckoo’s golden flute-notes;<br/>
Call at morning, call at evening,<br/>
Call within the hour of noontide,<br/>
For the better growth of forests,<br/>
For the ripening of the barley,<br/>
For the richness of, the Northland,<br/>
For the joy of Kalevala.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap03"/>RUNE III.<br/>
WAINAMOINEN AND YOUKAHAINEN.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Passed his years in full contentment,<br/>
On the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
On the plains of Kalevala,<br/>
Singing ever wondrous legends,<br/>
Songs of ancient wit and wisdom,<br/>
Chanting one day, then a second,<br/>
Singing in the dusk of evening,<br/>
Singing till the dawn of morning,<br/>
Now the tales of old-time heroes,<br/>
Tales of ages long forgotten,<br/>
Now the legends of creation,<br/>
Once familiar to the children,<br/>
By our children sung no longer,<br/>
Sung in part by many heroes,<br/>
In these mournful days of evil,<br/>
Evil days our race befallen.<br/>
Far and wide the story travelled,<br/>
Far away men spread the knowledge<br/>
Of the chanting of the hero,<br/>
Of the song of Wainamoinen;<br/>
To the South were heard the echoes,<br/>
All of Northland heard the story.<br/>
Far away in dismal Northland,<br/>
Lived the singer, Youkahainen,<br/>
Lapland’s young and reckless minstrel,<br/>
Once upon a time when feasting,<br/>
Dining with his friends and fellows,<br/>
Came upon his ears the story<br/>
That there lived a sweeter singer,<br/>
On the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
On the plains of Kalevala,<br/>
Better skilled in chanting legends,<br/>
Better skilled than Youkahainen,<br/>
Better than the one that taught him.<br/>
Straightway then the bard grew angry,<br/>
Envy rose within his bosom,<br/>
Envy of this Wainamoinen,<br/>
Famed to be a sweeter singer;<br/>
Hastes he angry to his mother,<br/>
To his mother, full of wisdom,<br/>
Vows that he will southward hasten,<br/>
Hie him southward and betake him<br/>
To the dwellings of Wainola,<br/>
To the cabins of the Northland,<br/>
There as bard to vie in battle,<br/>
With the famous Wainamoinen.<br/>
“Nay,” replies the anxious father,<br/>
“Do not go to Kalevala.”<br/>
“Nay,” replies the fearful mother,<br/>
“Go not hence to Wainamoinen,<br/>
There with him to offer battle;<br/>
He will charm thee with his singing<br/>
Will bewitch thee in his anger,<br/>
He will drive thee back dishonored,<br/>
Sink thee in the fatal snow-drift,<br/>
Turn to ice thy pliant fingers,<br/>
Turn to ice thy feet and ankles.”<br/>
These the words of Youkahainen:<br/>
Good the judgement of a father,<br/>
Better still, a mother’s counsel,<br/>
Best of all one’s own decision.<br/>
I will go and face the minstrel,<br/>
Challenge him to sing in contest,<br/>
Challenge him as bard to battle,<br/>
Sing to him my sweet-toned measures,<br/>
Chant to him my oldest legends,<br/>
Chant to him my garnered wisdom,<br/>
That this best of boasted singers,<br/>
That this famous bard of Suomi,<br/>
Shall be worsted in the contest,<br/>
Shall become a hapless minstrel;<br/>
By my songs shall I transform him,<br/>
That his feet shall be as flint-stone,<br/>
And as oak his nether raiment;<br/>
And this famous, best of singers,<br/>
Thus bewitched, shall carry ever,<br/>
In his heart a stony burden,<br/>
On his shoulder bow of marble,<br/>
On his hand a flint-stone gauntlet,<br/>
On his brow a stony visor.”<br/>
Then the wizard, Youkahainen,<br/>
Heeding not advice paternal,<br/>
Heeding not his mother’s counsel,<br/>
Leads his courser from his stable,<br/>
Fire outstreaming from his nostrils,<br/>
From his hoofs, the sparks outshooting,<br/>
Hitches to his sledge, the fleet-foot,<br/>
To his golden sledge, the courser,<br/>
Mounts impetuous his snow-sledge,<br/>
Leaps upon the hindmost cross-bench,<br/>
Strikes his courser with his birch-whip,<br/>
With his birch-whip, pearl-enamelled.<br/>
Instantly the prancing racer<br/>
Springs away upon his journey;<br/>
On he, restless, plunges northward,<br/>
All day long be onward gallops,<br/>
All the next day, onward, onward,<br/>
So the third from morn till evening,<br/>
Till the third day twilight brings him<br/>
To the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala.<br/>
As it happened, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
Rode that sunset on the highway,<br/>
Silently for pleasure driving<br/>
Down Wainola’s peaceful meadows,<br/>
O’er the plains of Kalevala.<br/>
Youkahainen, young and fiery,<br/>
Urging still his foaming courser,<br/>
Dashes down upon the singer,<br/>
Does not turn aside in meeting,<br/>
Meeting thus in full collision;<br/>
Shafts are driven tight together,<br/>
Hames and collars wedged and tangled,<br/>
Tangled are the reins and traces.<br/>
Thus perforce they make a stand-still,<br/>
Thus remain and well consider;<br/>
Water drips from hame and collar,<br/>
Vapors rise from both their horses.<br/>
Speaks the minstrel, Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Who art thou, and whence? Thou comest<br/>
Driving like a stupid stripling,<br/>
Wainamoinen and Youkahainen.<br/>
Careless, dashing down upon me.<br/>
Thou hast ruined shafts and traces;<br/>
And the collar of my racer<br/>
Thou hast shattered into ruin,<br/>
And my golden sleigh is broken,<br/>
Box and runners dashed to pieces.”<br/>
Youkahainen then make answer,<br/>
Spake at last the words that follow:<br/>
“I am youthful Youkahainen,<br/>
But make answer first, who thou art,<br/>
Whence thou comest, where thou goest,<br/>
From what lowly tribe descended?”<br/>
Wainamolinen, wise and ancient,<br/>
Answered thus the youthful minstrel:<br/>
“If thou art but Youkahainen,<br/>
Thou shouldst give me all the highway;<br/>
I am many years thy senior.”<br/>
Then the boastful Youkahainen<br/>
Spake again to Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Young or ancient, little matter,<br/>
Little consequence the age is;<br/>
He that higher stands in wisdom,<br/>
He whose knowledge is the greater,<br/>
He that is the sweeter singer,<br/>
He alone shall keep the highway,<br/>
And the other take the roadside.<br/>
Art thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Famous sorcerer and minstrel?<br/>
Let us then begin our singing,<br/>
Let us sing our ancient legends,<br/>
Let us chant our garnered wisdom,<br/>
That the one may hear the other,<br/>
That the one may judge the other,<br/>
In a war of wizard sayings.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,<br/>
Thus replied in modest accents:<br/>
“What I know is very little,<br/>
Hardly is it worth the singing,<br/>
Neither is my singing wondrous:<br/>
All my days I have resided<br/>
In the cold and dreary Northland,<br/>
In a desert land enchanted,<br/>
In my cottage home for ayes;<br/>
All the songs that I have gathered,<br/>
Are the cuckoo’s simple measures,<br/>
Some of these I may remember;<br/>
But since thou perforce demandest,<br/>
I accept thy boastful challenge.<br/>
Tell me now, my golden youngster,<br/>
What thou knowest more than others,<br/>
Open now thy store of wisdom.”<br/>
Thus made answer Youkahainen,<br/>
Lapland’s young and fiery minstrel:<br/>
“Know I many bits of learning<br/>
This I know in perfect clearness:<br/>
Every roof must have a chimney,<br/>
Every fire-place have a hearth-stone;<br/>
Lives of seal are free and merry,<br/>
Merry is the life of walrus,<br/>
Feeding on incautious salmon,<br/>
Daily eating perch and whiting;<br/>
Whitings live in quiet shallows,<br/>
Salmon love the level bottoms;<br/>
Spawns the pike in coldest weather,<br/>
And defies the storms of winter.<br/>
Slowly perches swim in Autumn,<br/>
Wry-backed, hunting deeper water,<br/>
Spawn in shallows in the summer,<br/>
Bounding on the shore of ocean.<br/>
Should this wisdom seem too little,<br/>
I can tell thee other matters,<br/>
Sing thee other wizard sayings:<br/>
All the Northmen plow with reindeer,<br/>
Mother-horses plow the Southland,<br/>
Inner Lapland plows with oxen;<br/>
All the trees on Pisa-mountain,<br/>
Know I well in all their grandeur;<br/>
On the Horna-rock are fir-trees,<br/>
Fir-trees growing tall and slender;<br/>
Slender grow the trees on mountains.<br/>
Three, the water-falls in number,<br/>
Three in number, inland oceans,<br/>
Three in number, lofty mountains,<br/>
Shooting to the vault of heaven.<br/>
Hallapyora’s near to Yaemen,<br/>
Katrakoski in Karyala;<br/>
Imatra, the falling water,<br/>
Tumbles, roaring, into Wuoksi.”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainimoinen:<br/>
“Women’s tales and children’s wisdom<br/>
Do not please a bearded hero,<br/>
Hero, old enough for wedlock;<br/>
Tell the story of creation,<br/>
Tell me of the world’s beginning,<br/>
Tell me of the creatures in it,<br/>
And philosophize a little.”<br/>
Then the youthful Youkahainen<br/>
Thus replied to Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Know I well the titmouse-fountains,<br/>
Pretty birdling is the titmouse;<br/>
And the viper, green, a serpent;<br/>
Whitings live in brackish waters;<br/>
Perches swim in every river;<br/>
Iron rusts, and rusting weakens;<br/>
Bitter is the taste of umber;<br/>
Boiling water is malicious;<br/>
Fire is ever full of danger;<br/>
First physician, the Creator;<br/>
Remedy the oldest, water;<br/>
Magic is the child of sea-foam;<br/>
God the first and best adviser;<br/>
Waters gush from every mountain;<br/>
Fire descended first from heaven;<br/>
Iron from the rust was fashioned;<br/>
Copper from the rocks created;<br/>
Marshes are of lands the oldest;<br/>
First of all the trees, the willow;<br/>
Fir-trees were the first of houses;<br/>
Hollowed stones the first of kettles.”<br/>
Now the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Thus addresses Youkahainen:<br/>
“Canst thou give me now some wisdom,<br/>
Is this nonsense all thou knowest?”<br/>
Youkahainen thus made answer:<br/>
“I can tell thee still a trifle,<br/>
Tell thee of the times primeval,<br/>
When I plowed the salt-sea’s bosom,<br/>
When I raked the sea-girt islands,<br/>
When I dug the salmon-grottoes,<br/>
Hollowed out the deepest caverns,<br/>
When I all the lakes created,<br/>
When I heaped the mountains round them,<br/>
When I piled the rocks about them.<br/>
I was present as a hero,<br/>
Sixth of wise and ancient heroes,<br/>
Seventh of all primeval heroes,<br/>
When the heavens were created,<br/>
When were formed the ether-spaces,<br/>
When the sky was crystal-pillared,<br/>
When was arched the beauteous rainbow,<br/>
When the Moon was placed in orbit,<br/>
When the silver Sun was planted,<br/>
When the Bear was firmly stationed,<br/>
And with stars the heavens were sprinkled.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Thou art surely prince of liars,<br/>
Lord of all the host of liars;<br/>
Never wert thou in existence,<br/>
Surely wert thou never present,<br/>
When was plowed the salt-sea’s bosom,<br/>
When were raked the sea-girt islands,<br/>
When were dug the salmon-grottoes,<br/>
When were hollowed out the caverns,<br/>
When the lakes were all created,<br/>
When were heaped the mountains round them,<br/>
When the rocks were piled about them.<br/>
Thou wert never seen or heard of<br/>
When the earth was first created,<br/>
When were made the ether-spaces,<br/>
When the air was crystal-pillared,<br/>
When the Moon was placed in orbit,<br/>
When the silver Sun was planted,<br/>
When the Bear was firmly stationed,<br/>
When the skies with stars were sprinkled.”<br/>
Then in anger Youkahainen<br/>
Answered ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Then, sir, since I fail in wisdom,<br/>
With the sword I offer battle;<br/>
Come thou, famous bard and minstrel,<br/>
Thou the ancient wonder-singer,<br/>
Let us try our strength with broadswords,<br/>
let our blades be fully tested.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Not thy sword and not thy wisdom,<br/>
Not thy prudence, nor thy cunning,<br/>
Do I fear a single moment.<br/>
Let who may accept thy challenge,<br/>
Not with thee, a puny braggart,<br/>
Not with one so vain and paltry,<br/>
Will I ever measure broadswords.”<br/>
Then the youthful Youkahainen,<br/>
Mouth awry and visage sneering,<br/>
Shook his golden locks and answered:<br/>
“Whoso fears his blade to measure,<br/>
Fears to test his strength at broadswords,<br/>
Into wild-boar of the forest,<br/>
Swine at heart and swine in visage,<br/>
Singing I will thus transform him;<br/>
I will hurl such hero-cowards,<br/>
This one hither, that one thither,<br/>
Stamp him in the mire and bedding,<br/>
In the rubbish of the stable.”<br/>
Angry then grew Wainamoinen,<br/>
Wrathful waxed, and fiercely frowning,<br/>
Self-composed he broke his silence,<br/>
And began his wondrous singing.<br/>
Sang he not the tales of childhood,<br/>
Children’s nonsense, wit of women,<br/>
Sang he rather bearded heroes,<br/>
That the children never heard of,<br/>
That the boys and maidens knew not<br/>
Known but half by bride and bridegroom,<br/>
Known in part by many heroes,<br/>
In these mournful days of evil,<br/>
Evil times our race befallen.<br/>
Grandly sang wise Wainamoinen,<br/>
Till the copper-bearing mountains,<br/>
And the flinty rocks and ledges<br/>
Heard his magic tones and trembled;<br/>
Mountain cliffs were torn to pieces,<br/>
All the ocean heaved and tumbled;<br/>
And the distant hills re-echoed.<br/>
Lo! the boastful Youkahainen<br/>
Is transfixed in silent wonder,<br/>
And his sledge with golden trimmings<br/>
Floats like brushwood on the billows;<br/>
Sings his braces into reed-grass,<br/>
Sings his reins to twigs of willow,<br/>
And to shrubs his golden cross-bench.<br/>
Lo! his birch-whip, pearl-enameled,<br/>
Floats a reed upon the border;<br/>
Lo! his steed with golden forehead,<br/>
Stands a statue on the waters;<br/>
Hames and traces are as fir-boughs,<br/>
And his collar, straw and sea-grass.<br/>
Still the minstrel sings enchantment,<br/>
Sings his sword with golden handle,<br/>
Sings it into gleam of lightning,<br/>
Hangs it in the sky above him;<br/>
Sings his cross-bow, gaily painted,<br/>
To a rainbow o’er the ocean;<br/>
Sings his quick and feathered arrows<br/>
Into hawks and screaming eagles;<br/>
Sings his dog with bended muzzle,<br/>
Into block of stone beside him;<br/>
Sings his cap from off his forehead,<br/>
Sings it into wreaths of vapor;<br/>
From his hands he sings his gauntlets<br/>
Into rushes on the waters;<br/>
Sings his vesture, purple-colored,<br/>
Into white clouds in the heavens;<br/>
Sings his girdle, set with jewels,<br/>
Into twinkling stars around him;<br/>
And alas! for Youkahainen,<br/>
Sings him into deeps of quick-sand;<br/>
Ever deeper, deeper, deeper,<br/>
In his torture, sinks the wizard,<br/>
To his belt in mud and water.<br/>
Now it was that Youkahainen<br/>
Comprehended but too clearly<br/>
What his folly, what the end was,<br/>
Of the journey he had ventured,<br/>
Vainly he had undertaken<br/>
For the glory of a contest<br/>
With the grand, old Wainamoinen.<br/>
When at last young Youkahainen,<br/>
Pohyola’s old and sorry stripling,<br/>
Strives his best to move his right foot,<br/>
But alas! the foot obeys not;<br/>
When he strives to move his left foot,<br/>
Lo! he finds it turned to flint-stone.<br/>
Thereupon sad Youkahainen,<br/>
In the deeps of desperation,<br/>
And in earnest supplication,<br/>
Thus addresses Wainamoinen:<br/>
“O thou wise and worthy minstrel,<br/>
Thou the only true, magician,<br/>
Cease I pray thee thine enchantment,.<br/>
Only turn away thy magic,<br/>
Let me leave this slough of horror,<br/>
Loose me from this stony prison,<br/>
Free me from this killing torment,<br/>
I will pay a golden ransom.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“What the ransom thou wilt give me<br/>
If I cease from mine enchantment,<br/>
If I turn away my magic,<br/>
Lift thee from thy slough of horror,<br/>
Loose thee from thy stony prison,<br/>
Free thee from thy killing torment?”<br/>
Answered youthful Youkahainen:<br/>
“Have at home two magic cross-bows,<br/>
Pair of bows of wondrous power,<br/>
One so light a child can bend it,<br/>
Only strength can bend the other,<br/>
Take of these the one that pleases.”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Do not wish thy magic cross-bows,<br/>
Have a few of such already,<br/>
Thine to me are worse than useless<br/>
I have bows in great abundance,<br/>
Bows on every nail and rafter,<br/>
Bows that laugh at all the hunters,<br/>
Bows that go themselves a-hunting.”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Sang alas! poor Youkahainen<br/>
Deeper into mud and water,<br/>
Deeper in the slough of torment.<br/>
Youkahainen thus made answer:<br/>
“Have at home two magic shallops,<br/>
Beautiful the boats and wondrous;<br/>
One rides light upon the ocean,<br/>
One is made for heavy burdens;<br/>
Take of these the one that pleases.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Do not wish thy magic shallops,<br/>
Have enough of such already;<br/>
All my bays are full of shallops,<br/>
All my shores are lined with shallops,<br/>
Some before the winds are sailors,<br/>
Some were built to sail against them.”<br/>
Still the Wainola bard and minstrel<br/>
Sings again poor Youkahainen<br/>
Deeper, deeper into torment,<br/>
Into quicksand to his girdle,<br/>
Till the Lapland bard in anguish<br/>
Speaks again to Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Have at home two magic stallions,<br/>
One a racer, fleet as lightning,<br/>
One was born for heavy burdens;<br/>
Take of these the one that pleases.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Neither do I wish thy stallions,<br/>
Do not need thy hawk-limbed stallions,<br/>
Have enough of these already;<br/>
Magic stallions swarm my stables,<br/>
Eating corn at every manger,<br/>
Broad of back to hold the water,<br/>
Water on each croup in lakelets.”<br/>
Still the bard of Kalevala<br/>
Sings the hapless Lapland minstrel<br/>
Deeper, deeper into torment,<br/>
To his shoulders into water.<br/>
Spake again young Youkahainen:<br/>
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Thou the only true magician,<br/>
Cease I pray thee thine enchantment,<br/>
Only turn away thy magic,<br/>
I will give thee gold abundant,<br/>
Countless stores of shining silver;<br/>
From the wars my father brought it,<br/>
Brought it from the hard-fought battles.”<br/>
Spake the wise, old Wainamoinen:<br/>
“For thy gold I have no longing,<br/>
Neither do I wish thy silver,<br/>
Have enough of each already;<br/>
Gold abundant fills my chambers,<br/>
On each nail hang bags of silver,<br/>
Gold that glitters in the sunshine,<br/>
Silver shining in the moonlight.”<br/>
Sank the braggart, Youkahainen,<br/>
Deeper in his slough of torment,<br/>
To his chin in mud and water,<br/>
Ever praying, thus beseeching:<br/>
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Greatest of the old magicians,<br/>
Lift me from this pit of horror,<br/>
From this prison-house of torture;<br/>
I will give thee all my corn-fields,<br/>
Give thee all my corn in garners,<br/>
Thus my hapless life to ransom,<br/>
Thus to gain eternal freedom.”<br/>
Wainamoinen thus made answer:<br/>
“Take thy corn to other markets,<br/>
Give thy garners to the needy;<br/>
I have corn in great abundance,<br/>
Fields have I in every quarter,<br/>
Corn in all my fields is growing;<br/>
One’s own fields are always richer,<br/>
One’s own grain is much the sweeter.”<br/>
Lapland’s young and reckless minstrel,<br/>
Sorrow-laden, thus enchanted,<br/>
Deeper sinks in mud and water,<br/>
Fear-enchained and full of anguish,<br/>
In the mire, his beard bedrabbled,<br/>
Mouth once boastful filled with sea-weed,<br/>
In the grass his teeth entangled,<br/>
Youkahainen thus beseeches:<br/>
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Wisest of the wisdom-singers,<br/>
Cease at last thine incantations,<br/>
Only turn away thy magic,<br/>
And my former life restore me,<br/>
Lift me from this stifling torment,<br/>
Free mine eyes from sand and water,<br/>
I will give thee sister, Aino,<br/>
Fairest daughter of my mother,<br/>
Bride of thine to be forever,<br/>
Bride of thine to do thy pleasure,<br/>
Sweep the rooms within thy cottage,<br/>
Keep thy dwelling-place in order,<br/>
Rinse for thee the golden platters,<br/>
Spread thy couch with finest linens,<br/>
For thy bed, weave golden covers,<br/>
Bake for thee the honey-biscuit.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Finds at last the wished-for ransom,<br/>
Lapland’s young and fairest daughter,<br/>
Sister dear of Youkahainen;<br/>
Happy he, that he has won him,<br/>
In his age a beauteous maiden,<br/>
Bride of his to be forever,<br/>
Pride and joy of Kalevala.<br/>
Now the happy Wainamoinen,<br/>
Sits upon the rock of gladness,<br/>
Joyful on the rock of music,<br/>
Sings a little, sings and ceases,<br/>
Sings again, and sings a third time,<br/>
Thus to break the spell of magic,<br/>
Thus to lessen the enchantment,<br/>
Thus the potent charm to banish.<br/>
As the magic spell is broken,<br/>
Youkahainen, sad, but wiser,<br/>
Drags his feet from out the quicksand,<br/>
Lifts his beard from out the water,<br/>
From the rocks leads forth his courser,<br/>
Brings his sledge back from the rushes,<br/>
Calls his whip back from the ocean,<br/>
Sets his golden sledge in order,<br/>
Throws himself upon the cross-bench,<br/>
Snaps his whip and hies him homeward,<br/>
Hastens homeward, heavy-hearted,<br/>
Sad indeed to meet his mother,<br/>
Aino’s mother, gray and aged.<br/>
Careless thus be hastens homeward,<br/>
Nears his home with noise and bustle,<br/>
Reckless drives against the pent-house,<br/>
Breaks the shafts against the portals,<br/>
Breaks his handsome sledge in pieces.<br/>
Then his mother, quickly guessing,<br/>
Would have chided him for rashness,<br/>
But the father interrupted:<br/>
“Wherefore dost thou break thy snow-sledge,<br/>
Wherefore dash thy thills in fragments,<br/>
Wherefore comest home so strangely,<br/>
Why this rude and wild behavior?”<br/>
Now alas! poor Youkahainen,<br/>
Cap awry upon his forehead,<br/>
Falls to weeping, broken-hearted,<br/>
Head depressed and mind dejected,<br/>
Eyes and lips expressing sadness,<br/>
Answers not his anxious father.<br/>
Then the mother quickly asked him,<br/>
Sought to find his cause for sorrow:<br/>
“Tell me, first-born, why thou weepest,<br/>
Why thou weepest, heavy-hearted,<br/>
Why thy mind is so dejected,<br/>
Why thine eyes express such sadness.”<br/>
Youkahainen then made answer:<br/>
“Golden mother, ever faithful,<br/>
Cause there is to me sufficient,<br/>
Cause enough in what has happened,<br/>
Bitter cause for this my sorrow,<br/>
Cause for bitter tears and murmurs:<br/>
All my days will pass unhappy,<br/>
Since, O mother of my being,<br/>
I have promised beauteous Aino,<br/>
Aino, thy beloved daughter,<br/>
Aino, my devoted sister,<br/>
To decrepit Wainamoinen,<br/>
Bride to be to him forever,<br/>
Roof above him, prop beneath him,<br/>
Fair companion at his fire-side.”<br/>
Joyful then arose the mother,<br/>
Clapped her hands in glee together,<br/>
Thus addressing Youkahainen:<br/>
“Weep no more, my son beloved,<br/>
Thou hast naught to cause thy weeping,<br/>
Hast no reason for thy sorrow,<br/>
Often I this hope have cherished;<br/>
Many years have I been praying<br/>
That this mighty bard and hero,<br/>
Wise and valiant Wainamoinen,<br/>
Spouse should be to beauteous Aino,<br/>
Son-in-law to me, her mother.”<br/>
But the fair and lovely maiden,<br/>
Sister dear of Youkahainen,<br/>
Straightway fell to bitter weeping,<br/>
On the threshold wept and lingered,<br/>
Wept all day and all the night long,<br/>
Wept a second, then a third day,<br/>
Wept because a bitter sorrow<br/>
On her youthful heart had fallen.<br/>
Then the gray-haired mother asked her:<br/>
“Why this weeping, lovely Aino?<br/>
Thou hast found a noble suitor,<br/>
Thou wilt rule his spacious dwelling,<br/>
At his window sit and rest thee,<br/>
Rinse betimes his golden platters,<br/>
Walk a queen within his dwelling.”<br/>
Thus replied the tearful Aino:<br/>
“Mother dear, and all-forgiving,<br/>
Cause enough for this my sorrow,<br/>
Cause enough for bitter weeping:<br/>
I must loose my sunny tresses,<br/>
Tresses beautiful and golden,<br/>
Cannot deck my hair with jewels,<br/>
Cannot bind my head with ribbons,<br/>
All to be hereafter hidden<br/>
Underneath the linen bonnet<br/>
That the wife. must wear forever;<br/>
Weep at morning, weep at evening,<br/>
Weep alas! for waning beauty,<br/>
Childhood vanished, youth departed,<br/>
Silver sunshine, golden moonlight,<br/>
Hope and pleasure of my childhood,<br/>
Taken from me now forever,<br/>
And so soon to be forgotten<br/>
At the tool-bench of my brother,<br/>
At the window of my sister,<br/>
In the cottage of my father.”<br/>
Spake again the gray-haired mother<br/>
To her wailing daughter Aino:<br/>
“Cease thy sorrow, foolish maiden,<br/>
By thy tears thou art ungrateful,<br/>
Reason none for thy repining,<br/>
Not the slightest cause for weeping;<br/>
Everywhere the silver sunshine<br/>
Falls as bright on other households;<br/>
Not alone the moonlight glimmers<br/>
Through thy father’s open windows,<br/>
On the work-bench of thy brother;<br/>
Flowers bloom in every meadow,<br/>
Berries grow on every mountain;<br/>
Thou canst go thyself and find them,<br/>
All the day long go and find them;<br/>
Not alone thy brother’s meadows<br/>
Grow the beauteous vines and flowers;<br/>
Not alone thy father’s mountains<br/>
Yield the ripe, nutritious berries;<br/>
Flowers bloom in other meadows,<br/>
Berries grow on other mountains,<br/>
There as here, my lovely Aino.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap04"/>RUNE IV.<br/>
THE FATE OF AINO.</h2>
<p>When the night had passed, the maiden,<br/>
Sister fair of Youkahainen,<br/>
Hastened early to the forest,<br/>
Birchen shoots for brooms to gather,<br/>
Went to gather birchen tassels;<br/>
Bound a bundle for her father,<br/>
Bound a birch-broom for her mother,<br/>
Silken tassels for her sister.<br/>
Straightway then she hastened homeward,<br/>
By a foot-path left the forest;<br/>
As she neared the woodland border,<br/>
Lo! the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Quickly spying out the maiden,<br/>
As she left the birchen woodland,<br/>
Trimly dressed in costly raiment,<br/>
And the minstrel thus addressed her:<br/>
“Aino, beauty of the Northland,<br/>
Wear not, lovely maid, for others,<br/>
Only wear for me, sweet maiden,<br/>
Golden cross upon thy bosom,<br/>
Shining pearls upon thy shoulders;<br/>
Bind for me thine auburn tresses,<br/>
Wear for me thy golden braidlets.”<br/>
Thus the maiden quickly answered:<br/>
“Not for thee and not for others,<br/>
Hang I from my neck the crosslet,<br/>
Deck my hair with silken ribbons;<br/>
Need no more the many trinkets<br/>
Brought to me by ship or shallop;<br/>
Sooner wear the simplest raiment,<br/>
Feed upon the barley bread-crust,<br/>
Dwell forever with my mother<br/>
In the cabin with my father.”<br/>
Then she threw the gold cross from her,<br/>
Tore the jewels from her fingers,<br/>
Quickly loosed her shining necklace,<br/>
Quick untied her silken ribbons,<br/>
Cast them all away indignant<br/>
Into forest ferns and flowers.<br/>
Thereupon the maiden, Aino,<br/>
Hastened to her mother’s cottage.<br/>
At the window sat her father<br/>
Whittling on an oaken ax-helve:<br/>
“Wherefore weepest, beauteous Aino,<br/>
Aino, my beloved daughter?<br/>
“Cause enough for weeping, father,<br/>
Good the reasons for my mourning,<br/>
This, the reason for my weeping,<br/>
This, the cause of all my sorrow:<br/>
From my breast I tore the crosslet,<br/>
From my belt, the clasp of copper,<br/>
From my waist, the belt of silver,<br/>
Golden was my pretty crosslet.”<br/>
Near the door-way sat her brother,<br/>
Carving out a birchen ox-bow:<br/>
“Why art weeping, lovely Aino,<br/>
Aino, my devoted sister?”<br/>
“Cause enough for weeping, brother,<br/>
Good the reasons for my mourning<br/>
Therefore come I as thou seest,<br/>
Rings no longer on my fingers,<br/>
On my neck no pretty necklace;<br/>
Golden were the rings thou gavest,<br/>
And the necklace, pearls and silver!”<br/>
On the threshold sat her sister,<br/>
Weaving her a golden girdle:<br/>
“Why art weeping, beauteous Aino,<br/>
Aino, my beloved sister?”<br/>
“Cause enough for weeping, sister,<br/>
Good the reasons for my sorrow:<br/>
Therefore come I as thou seest,<br/>
On my head no scarlet fillet,<br/>
In my hair no braids of silver,<br/>
On mine arms no purple ribbons,<br/>
Round my neck no shining necklace,<br/>
On my breast no golden crosslet,<br/>
In mine ears no golden ear-rings.”<br/>
Near the door-way of the dairy,<br/>
Skimming cream, sat Aino’s mother.<br/>
“Why art weeping, lovely Aino,<br/>
Aino, my devoted daughter?”<br/>
Thus the sobbing maiden answered;<br/>
“Loving mother, all-forgiving,<br/>
Cause enough for this my weeping,<br/>
Good the reasons for my sorrow,<br/>
Therefore do I weep, dear mother:<br/>
I have been within the forest,<br/>
Brooms to bind and shoots to gather,<br/>
There to pluck some birchen tassels;<br/>
Bound a bundle for my father,<br/>
Bound a second for my mother,<br/>
Bound a third one for my brother,<br/>
For my sister silken tassels.<br/>
Straightway then I hastened homeward,<br/>
By a foot-path left the forest;<br/>
As I reached the woodland border<br/>
Spake Osmoinen from the cornfield,<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
‘Wear not, beauteous maid, for others,<br/>
Only wear for me, sweet maiden,<br/>
On thy breast a golden crosslet,<br/>
Shining pearls upon thy shoulders,<br/>
Bind for me thine auburn tresses,<br/>
Weave for me thy silver braidlets.’<br/>
Then I threw the gold-cross from me,<br/>
Tore the jewels from my fingers,<br/>
Quickly loosed my shining necklace,<br/>
Quick untied my silken ribbons,<br/>
Cast them all away indignant,<br/>
Into forest ferns and flowers.<br/>
Then I thus addressed the singer:<br/>
‘Not for thee and not for others,<br/>
Hang I from my neck the crosslet,<br/>
Deck my hair with silken ribbons;<br/>
Need no more the many trinkets,<br/>
Brought to me by ship and shallop;<br/>
Sooner wear the simplest raiment,<br/>
Feed upon the barley bread-crust,<br/>
Dwell forever with my mother<br/>
In the cabin with my father.’”<br/>
Thus the gray-haired mother answered<br/>
Aino, her beloved daughter:<br/>
“Weep no more, my lovely maiden,<br/>
Waste no more of thy sweet young-life;<br/>
One year eat thou my sweet butter,<br/>
It will make thee strong and ruddy;<br/>
Eat another year fresh bacon,<br/>
It will make thee tall and queenly;<br/>
Eat a third year only dainties,<br/>
It will make thee fair and lovely.<br/>
Now make haste to yonder hill-top,<br/>
To the store-house on the mountain,<br/>
Open there the large compartment,<br/>
Thou will find it filled with boxes,<br/>
Chests and cases, trunks and boxes;<br/>
Open thou the box, the largest,<br/>
Lift away the gaudy cover,<br/>
Thou will find six golden girdles,<br/>
Seven rainbow-tinted dresses,<br/>
Woven by the Moon’s fair daughters,<br/>
Fashioned by the Sun’s sweet virgins.<br/>
In my young years once I wandered,<br/>
As a maiden on the mountains,<br/>
In the happy days of childhood,<br/>
Hunting berries in the coppice;<br/>
There by chance I heard the daughters<br/>
Of the Moon as they were weaving;<br/>
There I also heard the daughters<br/>
Of the Sun as they were spinning<br/>
On the red rims of the cloudlets,<br/>
O’er the blue edge of the forest,<br/>
On the border of the pine-wood,<br/>
On a high and distant mountain.<br/>
I approached them, drawing nearer,<br/>
Stole myself within their hearing,<br/>
Then began I to entreat them,<br/>
Thus besought them, gently pleading:<br/>
‘Give thy silver, Moon’s fair daughters,<br/>
To a poor, but worthy maiden;<br/>
Give thy gold, O Sun’s sweet virgins,<br/>
To this maiden, young and needy.’<br/>
Thereupon the Moon’s fair daughters<br/>
Gave me silver from their coffers;<br/>
And the Sun’s sweet shining virgins<br/>
Gave me gold from their abundance,<br/>
Gold to deck my throbbing temples,<br/>
For my hair the shining silver.<br/>
Then I hastened joyful homeward,<br/>
Richly laden with my treasures,<br/>
Happy to my mother’s cottage;<br/>
Wore them one day, than a second,<br/>
Then a third day also wore them,<br/>
Took the gold then from my temples,<br/>
From my hair I took the silver,<br/>
Careful laid them in their boxes,<br/>
Many seasons have they lain there,<br/>
Have not seen them since my childhood.<br/>
Deck thy brow with silken ribbon,<br/>
Trim with gold thy throbbing temples,<br/>
And thy neck with pearly necklace,<br/>
Hang the gold-cross on thy bosom,<br/>
Robe thyself in pure, white linen<br/>
Spun from flax of finest fiber;<br/>
Wear withal the richest short-frock,<br/>
Fasten it with golden girdle;<br/>
On thy feet, put silken stockings,<br/>
With the shoes of finest leather;<br/>
Deck thy hair with golden braidlets,<br/>
Bind it well with threads of silver;<br/>
Trim with rings thy fairy fingers,<br/>
And thy hands with dainty ruffles;<br/>
Come bedecked then to thy chamber,<br/>
Thus return to this thy household,<br/>
To the greeting of thy kindred,<br/>
To the joy of all that know thee,<br/>
Flushed thy cheeks as ruddy berries,<br/>
Coming as thy father’s sunbeam,<br/>
Walking beautiful and queenly,<br/>
Far more beautiful than moonlight.”<br/>
Thus she spake to weeping Aino,<br/>
Thus the mother to her daughter;<br/>
But the maiden, little bearing,<br/>
Does not heed her mother’s wishes;<br/>
Straightway hastens to the court-yard,<br/>
There to weep in bitter sorrow,<br/>
All alone to weep in anguish.<br/>
Waiting long the wailing Aino<br/>
Thus at last soliloquizes:<br/>
“Unto what can I now liken<br/>
Happy homes and joys of fortune?<br/>
Like the waters in the river,<br/>
Like the waves in yonder lakelet,<br/>
Like the crystal waters flowing.<br/>
Unto what, the biting sorrow<br/>
Of the child of cold misfortune?<br/>
Like the spirit of the sea-duck,<br/>
Like the icicle in winter,<br/>
Water in the well imprisoned.<br/>
Often roamed my mind in childhood,<br/>
When a maiden free and merry,<br/>
Happily through fen and fallow,<br/>
Gamboled on the meads with lambkins,<br/>
Lingered with the ferns and flowers,<br/>
Knowing neither pain nor trouble;<br/>
Now my mind is filled with sorrow,<br/>
Wanders though the bog and stubble,<br/>
Wanders weary through the brambles,<br/>
Roams throughout the dismal forest,<br/>
Till my life is filled with darkness,<br/>
And my spirit white with anguish.<br/>
Better had it been for Aino<br/>
Had she never seen the sunlight,<br/>
Or if born had died an infant,<br/>
Had not lived to be a maiden<br/>
In these days of sin and sorrow,<br/>
Underneath a star so luckless.<br/>
Better had it been for Aino,<br/>
Had she died upon the eighth day<br/>
After seven nights had vanished;<br/>
Needed then but little linen,<br/>
Needed but a little coffin,<br/>
And a grave of smallest measure;<br/>
Mother would have mourned a little,<br/>
Father too perhaps a trifle,<br/>
Sister would have wept the day through,<br/>
Brother might have shed a tear-drop,<br/>
Thus had ended all the mourning.”<br/>
Thus poor Aino wept and murmured,<br/>
Wept one day, and then a second,<br/>
Wept a third from morn till even,<br/>
When again her mother asked her:<br/>
“Why this weeping, fairest daughter,<br/>
Darling daughter, why this grieving?<br/>
Thus the tearful maiden answered:<br/>
Therefore do I weep and sorrow,<br/>
Wretched maiden all my life long,<br/>
Since poor Aino, thou hast given,<br/>
Since thy daughter thou hast promised<br/>
To the aged Wainamoinen,<br/>
Comfort to his years declining<br/>
Prop to stay him when he totters,<br/>
In the storm a roof above him,<br/>
In his home a cloak around him;<br/>
Better far if thou hadst sent me<br/>
Far below the salt-sea surges,<br/>
To become the whiting’s sister,<br/>
And the friend of perch and salmon;<br/>
Better far to ride the billows,<br/>
Swim the sea-foam as a mermaid,<br/>
And the friend of nimble fishes,<br/>
Than to be an old man’s solace,<br/>
Prop to stay him when be totters,<br/>
Hand to aid him when he trembles,<br/>
Arm to guide him when he falters,<br/>
Strength to give him when he weakens;<br/>
Better be the whiting’s sister<br/>
And the friend of perch and salmon,<br/>
Than an old man’s slave and darling.”<br/>
Ending thus she left her mother,<br/>
Straightway hastened to the mountain?<br/>
To the store-house on the summit,<br/>
Opened there the box the largest,<br/>
From the box six lids she lifted,<br/>
Found therein six golden girdles,<br/>
Silken dresses seven in number.<br/>
Choosing such as pleased her fancy,<br/>
She adorned herself as bidden,<br/>
Robed herself to look her fairest,<br/>
Gold upon her throbbing temples,<br/>
In her hair the shining silver,<br/>
On her shoulders purple ribbons,<br/>
Band of blue around her forehead,<br/>
Golden cross, and rings, and jewels,<br/>
Fitting ornaments to beauty.<br/>
Now she leaves her many treasures,<br/>
Leaves the store-house on the mountain,<br/>
Filled with gold and silver trinkets,<br/>
Wanders over field and meadow,<br/>
Over stone-fields waste and barren,<br/>
Wanders on through fen and forest,<br/>
Through the forest vast and cheerless,<br/>
Wanders hither, wanders thither,<br/>
Singing careless as she wanders,<br/>
This her mournful song and echo:<br/>
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!<br/>
Woe to Aino, broken-hearted!<br/>
Torture racks my heart and temples,<br/>
Yet the sting would not be deeper,<br/>
Nor the pain and anguish greater,<br/>
If beneath this weight of sorrow,<br/>
In my saddened heart’s dejection,<br/>
I should yield my life forever,<br/>
Now unhappy, I should perish!<br/>
Lo! the time has come for Aino<br/>
From this cruel world to hasten,<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
To the realm of the departed,<br/>
To the isle of the hereafter.<br/>
Weep no more for me, O Father,<br/>
Mother dear, withhold thy censure,<br/>
Lovely sister, dry thine eyelids,<br/>
Do not mourn me, dearest brother,<br/>
When I sink beneath the sea-foam,<br/>
Make my home in salmon-grottoes,<br/>
Make my bed in crystal waters,<br/>
Water-ferns my couch and pillow.”<br/>
All day long poor Aino wandered,<br/>
All the next day, sad and weary,<br/>
So the third from morn till evening,<br/>
Till the cruel night enwrapped her,<br/>
As she reached the sandy margin,<br/>
Reached the cold and dismal sea-shore,<br/>
Sat upon the rock of sorrow,<br/>
Sat alone in cold and darkness,<br/>
Listened only to the music<br/>
Of the winds and rolling billows,<br/>
Singing all the dirge of Aino.<br/>
All that night the weary maiden<br/>
Wept and wandered on the border<br/>
Through the sand and sea-washed pebbles.<br/>
As the day dawns, looking round her,<br/>
She beholds three water-maidens,<br/>
On a headland jutting seaward,<br/>
Water-maidens four in number,<br/>
Sitting on the wave-lashed ledges,<br/>
Swimming now upon the billows,<br/>
Now upon the rocks reposing.<br/>
Quick the weeping maiden, Aino,<br/>
Hastens there to join the mermaids,<br/>
Fairy maidens of the waters.<br/>
Weeping Aino, now disrobing,<br/>
Lays aside with care her garments,<br/>
Hangs her silk robes on the alders,<br/>
Drops her gold-cross on the sea-shore,<br/>
On the aspen hangs her ribbons,<br/>
On the rocks her silken stockings,<br/>
On the grass her shoes of deer-skin,<br/>
In the sand her shining necklace,<br/>
With her rings and other jewels.<br/>
Out at sea a goodly distance,<br/>
Stood a rock of rainbow colors,<br/>
Glittering in silver sunlight.<br/>
Toward it springs the hapless maiden,<br/>
Thither swims the lovely Aino,<br/>
Up the standing-stone has clambered,<br/>
Wishing there to rest a moment,<br/>
Rest upon the rock of beauty;<br/>
When upon a sudden swaying<br/>
To and fro among the billows,<br/>
With a crash and roar of waters<br/>
Falls the stone of many colors,<br/>
Falls upon the very bottom<br/>
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea.<br/>
With the stone of rainbow colors,<br/>
Falls the weeping maiden, Aino,<br/>
Clinging to its craggy edges,<br/>
Sinking far below the surface,<br/>
To the bottom of the blue-sea.<br/>
Thus the weeping maiden vanished.<br/>
Thus poor Aino sank and perished,<br/>
Singing as the stone descended,<br/>
Chanting thus as she departed:<br/>
Once to swim I sought the sea-side,<br/>
There to sport among the billows;<br/>
With the stone or many colors<br/>
Sank poor Aino to the bottom<br/>
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,<br/>
Like a pretty son-bird. perished.<br/>
Never come a-fishing, father,<br/>
To the borders of these waters,<br/>
Never during all thy life-time,<br/>
As thou lovest daughter Aino.<br/>
“Mother dear, I sought the sea-side,<br/>
There to sport among the billows;<br/>
With the stone of many colors,<br/>
Sank poor Aino to the bottom<br/>
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,<br/>
Like a pretty song-bird perished.<br/>
Never mix thy bread, dear mother,<br/>
With the blue-sea’s foam and waters,<br/>
Never during all thy life-time,<br/>
As thou lovest daughter Aino.<br/>
Brother dear, I sought the sea-side,<br/>
There to sport among the billows;<br/>
With the stone of many colors<br/>
Sank poor Aino to the bottom<br/>
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,<br/>
Like a pretty song-bird perished.<br/>
Never bring thy prancing war-horse,<br/>
Never bring thy royal racer,<br/>
Never bring thy steeds to water,<br/>
To the borders of the blue-sea,<br/>
Never during all thy life-time,<br/>
As thou lovest sister Aino.<br/>
“Sister dear, I sought the sea-side,<br/>
There to sport among the billows;<br/>
With the stone of many colors<br/>
Sank poor Aino to the bottom<br/>
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,<br/>
Like a pretty song-bird perished.<br/>
Never come to lave thine eyelids<br/>
In this rolling wave and sea-foam,<br/>
Never during all thy life-time,<br/>
As thou lovest sister Aino.<br/>
All the waters in the blue-sea<br/>
Shall be blood of Aino’s body;<br/>
All the fish that swim these waters<br/>
Shall be Aino’s flesh forever;<br/>
All the willows on the sea-side<br/>
Shall be Aino’s ribs hereafter;<br/>
All the sea-grass on the margin<br/>
Will have grown from Aino’s tresses.”<br/>
Thus at last the maiden vanished,<br/>
Thus the lovely Aino perished.<br/>
Who will tell the cruel story,<br/>
Who will bear the evil tidings<br/>
To the cottage of her mother,<br/>
Once the home of lovely Aino?<br/>
Will the bear repeat the story,<br/>
Tell the tidings to her mother?<br/>
Nay, the bear must not be herald,<br/>
He would slay the herds of cattle.<br/>
Who then tell the cruel story,<br/>
Who will bear the evil tidings<br/>
To the cottage of her father,<br/>
Once the home of lovely Aino?<br/>
Shall the wolf repeat the story,<br/>
Tell the sad news to her father?<br/>
Nay, the wolf must not be herald,<br/>
He would eat the gentle lambkins.<br/>
Who then tell the cruel story,<br/>
Who will bear the evil tidings.<br/>
To the cottage of her sister?<br/>
‘Will the fox repeat the story<br/>
Tell the tidings to her sister?<br/>
Nay, the fox must not be herald,<br/>
He would eat the ducks and chickens.<br/>
Who then tell the cruel story,<br/>
Who will bear the evil tidings<br/>
To the cottage of her brother,<br/>
Once the home of lovely Aino?<br/>
Shall the hare repeat the story,<br/>
Bear the sad news to her brother?<br/>
Yea, the hare shall be the herald,<br/>
Tell to all the cruel story.<br/>
Thus the harmless hare makes answer:<br/>
“I will bear the evil tidings<br/>
To the former home of Aino,<br/>
Tell the story to her kindred.”<br/>
Swiftly flew the long-eared herald,<br/>
Like the winds be hastened onward,<br/>
Galloped swift as flight of eagles;<br/>
Neck awry he bounded forward<br/>
Till he gained the wished-for cottage,<br/>
Once the home of lovely Aino.<br/>
Silent was the home, and vacant;<br/>
So he hastened to the bath-house,<br/>
Found therein a group of maidens,<br/>
Working each upon a birch-broom.<br/>
Sat the hare upon the threshold,<br/>
And the maidens thus addressed him:<br/>
“Hie e there, Long-legs, or we’ll roast thee,<br/>
Hie there, Big-eye, or we’ll stew thee,<br/>
Roast thee for our lady’s breakfast,<br/>
Stew thee for our master’s dinner,<br/>
Make of thee a meal for Aino,<br/>
And her brother, Youkahainen!<br/>
Better therefore thou shouldst gallop<br/>
To thy burrow in the mountains,<br/>
Than be roasted for our dinners.”<br/>
Then the haughty hare made answer,<br/>
Chanting thus the fate of Aino:<br/>
“Think ye not I journey hither,<br/>
To be roasted in the skillet,<br/>
To be stewed in yonder kettle<br/>
Let fell Lempo fill thy tables!<br/>
I have come with evil tidings,<br/>
Come to tell the cruel story<br/>
Of the flight and death of Aino,<br/>
Sister dear of Youkahainen.<br/>
With the stone of many colors<br/>
Sank poor Aino to the bottom<br/>
Of the deep and boundless waters,<br/>
Like a pretty song-bird perished;<br/>
Hung her ribbons on the aspen,<br/>
Left her gold-cross on the sea-shore,<br/>
Silken robes upon the alders,<br/>
On the rocks her silken stockings,<br/>
On the grass her shoes of deer-skin,<br/>
In the sand her shining necklace,<br/>
In the sand her rings and jewels;<br/>
In the waves, the lovely Aino,<br/>
Sleeping on the very bottom<br/>
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea,<br/>
In the caverns of the salmon,<br/>
There to be the whiting’s sister<br/>
And the friend of nimble fishes.”<br/>
Sadly weeps the ancient mother<br/>
From her blue-eyes bitter tear-drops,<br/>
As in sad and wailing measures,<br/>
Broken-hearted thus she answers:<br/>
“Listen, all ye mothers, listen,<br/>
Learn from me a tale of wisdom:<br/>
Never urge unwilling daughters<br/>
From the dwellings of their fathers,<br/>
To the bridegrooms that they love not,<br/>
Not as I, inhuman mother,<br/>
Drove away my lovely Aino,<br/>
Fairest daughter of the Northland.”<br/>
Sadly weeps the gray-haired mother,<br/>
And the tears that fall are bitter,<br/>
Flowing down her wrinkled visage,<br/>
Till they trickle on her bosom;<br/>
Then across her heaving bosom,<br/>
Till they reach her garment’s border;<br/>
Then adown her silken stockings,<br/>
Till they touch her shoes of deer-skin;<br/>
Then beneath her shoes of deer-skin,<br/>
Flowing on and flowing ever,<br/>
Part to earth as its possession,<br/>
Part to water as its portion.<br/>
As the tear-drops fall and mingle,<br/>
Form they streamlets three in number,<br/>
And their source, the mother’s eyelids,<br/>
Streamlets formed from pearly tear-drops,<br/>
Flowing on like little rivers,<br/>
And each streamlet larger growing,<br/>
Soon becomes a rushing torrent<br/>
In each rushing, roaring torrent<br/>
There a cataract is foaming,<br/>
Foaming in the silver sunlight;<br/>
From the cataract’s commotion<br/>
Rise three pillared rocks in grandeur;<br/>
From each rock, upon the summit,<br/>
Grow three hillocks clothed in verdure;<br/>
From each hillock, speckled birches,<br/>
Three in number, struggle skyward;<br/>
On the summit of each birch-tree<br/>
Sits a golden cuckoo calling,<br/>
And the three sing, all in concord:<br/>
“Love! O Love! the first one calleth;<br/>
Sings the second, Suitor! Suitor!<br/>
And the third one calls and echoes,<br/>
“Consolation! Consolation!”<br/>
He that “Love! O Love!” is calling,<br/>
Calls three moons and calls unceasing,<br/>
For the love-rejecting maiden<br/>
Sleeping in the deep sea-castles.<br/>
He that “Suitor! Suitor!” singeth,<br/>
Sings six moons and sings unceasing<br/>
For the suitor that forever<br/>
Sings and sues without a hearing.<br/>
He that sadly sings and echoes,<br/>
“Consolation! Consolation!”<br/>
Sings unceasing all his life long<br/>
For the broken-hearted mother<br/>
That must mourn and weep forever.<br/>
When the lone and wretched mother<br/>
Heard the sacred cuckoo singing,<br/>
Spake she thus, and sorely weeping:<br/>
“When I hear the cuckoo calling,<br/>
Then my heart is filled with sorrow;<br/>
Tears unlock my heavy eyelids,<br/>
Flow adown my, furrowed visage,<br/>
Tears as large as silver sea pearls;<br/>
Older grow my wearied elbows,<br/>
Weaker ply my aged fingers,<br/>
Wearily, in all its members,<br/>
Does my body shake in palsy,<br/>
When I hear the cuckoo singing,<br/>
Hear the sacred cuckoo calling.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap05"/>RUNE V.<br/>
WAINAVOINEN’S LAMENTATION.</h2>
<p>Far and wide the tidings travelled,<br/>
Far away men heard the story<br/>
Of the flight and death of Aino,<br/>
Sister dear of Youkahainen,<br/>
Fairest daughter of creation.<br/>
Wainamoinen, brave and truthful,<br/>
Straightway fell to bitter weeping,<br/>
Wept at morning, wept at evening,<br/>
Sleepless, wept the dreary night long,<br/>
That his Aino had departed,<br/>
That the maiden thus had vanished,<br/>
Thus had sunk upon the bottom<br/>
Of the blue-sea, deep and boundless.<br/>
Filled with grief, the ancient singer,<br/>
Wainamoinen of the Northland,<br/>
Heavy-hearted, sorely weeping,<br/>
Hastened to the restless waters,<br/>
This the suitor’s prayer and question:<br/>
“Tell, Untamo, tell me, dreamer,<br/>
Tell me, Indolence, thy visions,<br/>
Where the water-gods may linger,<br/>
Where may rest Wellamo’s maidens?”<br/>
Then Untamo, thus made answer,<br/>
Lazily he told his dreamings:<br/>
“Over there, the mermaid-dwellings,<br/>
Yonder live Wellamo’s maidens,<br/>
On the headland robed in verdure,<br/>
On the forest-covered island,<br/>
In the deep, pellucid waters,<br/>
On the purple-colored sea-shore;<br/>
Yonder is the home or sea-maids,<br/>
There the maidens of Wellamo,<br/>
Live there in their sea-side chambers,<br/>
Rest within their water-caverns,<br/>
On the rocks of rainbow colors,<br/>
On the juttings of the sea-cliffs.”<br/>
Straightway hastens Wainamoinen<br/>
To a boat-house on the sea-shore,<br/>
Looks with care upon the fish-hooks,<br/>
And the lines he well considers;<br/>
Lines, and hooks, and poles, arid fish-nets,<br/>
Places in a boat of copper,<br/>
Then begins he swiftly rowing<br/>
To the forest-covered island,<br/>
To the point enrobed In verdure,<br/>
To the purple-colored headland,<br/>
Where the sea-nymphs live and linger.<br/>
Hardly does he reach the island<br/>
Ere the minstrel starts to angle;<br/>
Far away he throws his fish-hook,<br/>
Trolls it quickly through the waters,<br/>
Turning on a copper swivel<br/>
Dangling from a silver fish-line,<br/>
Golden is the hook he uses.<br/>
Now he tries his silken fish-net,<br/>
Angles long, and angles longer,<br/>
Angles one day, then a second,<br/>
In the morning, in the evening,<br/>
Angles at the hour of noontide,<br/>
Many days and nights he angles,<br/>
Till at last, one sunny morning,<br/>
Strikes a fish of magic powers,<br/>
Plays like salmon on his fish-line,<br/>
Lashing waves across the waters,<br/>
Till at length the fish exhausted<br/>
Falls a victim to the angler,<br/>
Safely landed in the bottom<br/>
Of the hero’s boat of copper.<br/>
Wainamoinen, proudly viewing,<br/>
Speaks these words in wonder guessing:<br/>
“This the fairest of all sea-fish,<br/>
Never have I seen its equal,<br/>
Smoother surely than the salmon,<br/>
Brighter-spotted than the trout is,<br/>
Grayer than the pike of Suomi,<br/>
Has less fins than any female,<br/>
Not the fins of any male fish,<br/>
Not the stripes of sea-born maidens,<br/>
Not the belt of any mermaid,<br/>
Not the ears of any song-bird,<br/>
Somewhat like our Northland salmon<br/>
From the blue-sea’s deepest caverns.”<br/>
In his belt the ancient hero<br/>
Wore a knife insheathed with silver;<br/>
From its case he drew the fish-knife,<br/>
Thus to carve the fish in pieces,<br/>
Dress the nameless fish for roasting,<br/>
Make of it a dainty breakfast,<br/>
Make of it a meal at noon-day,<br/>
Make for him a toothsome supper,<br/>
Make the later meal at evening.<br/>
Straightway as the fish he touches,<br/>
Touches with his knife of silver,<br/>
Quick it leaps upon the waters,<br/>
Dives beneath the sea’s smooth surface,<br/>
From the boat with copper bottom,<br/>
From the skiff of Wainamoinen.<br/>
In the waves at goodly distance,<br/>
Quickly from the sea it rises<br/>
On the sixth and seventh billows,<br/>
Lifts its head above the waters,<br/>
Out of reach of fishing-tackle,<br/>
Then addresses Wainamoinen,<br/>
Chiding thus the ancient hero:<br/>
“Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Do not think that I came hither<br/>
To be fished for as a salmon,<br/>
Only to be chopped in pieces,<br/>
Dressed and eaten like a whiting<br/>
Make for thee a dainty breakfast,<br/>
Make for thee a meal at midday,<br/>
Make for thee a toothsome supper,<br/>
Make the fourth meal of the Northland.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Wherefore didst thou then come hither,<br/>
If it be not for my dinner?”<br/>
Thus the nameless fish made answer:<br/>
“Hither have I come, O minstrel,<br/>
In thine arms to rest and linger,<br/>
And thyself to love and cherish,<br/>
At thy side a life-companion,<br/>
And thy wife to be forever;<br/>
Deck thy couch with snowy linen,<br/>
Smooth thy head upon the pillow,<br/>
Sweep thy rooms and make them cheery,<br/>
Keep thy dwelling-place in order,<br/>
Build a fire for thee when needed,<br/>
Bake for thee the honey-biscuit,<br/>
Fill thy cup with barley-water,<br/>
Do for thee whatever pleases.<br/>
“I am not a scaly sea-fish,<br/>
Not a trout of Northland rivers,<br/>
Not a whiting from the waters,<br/>
Not a salmon of the North-seas,<br/>
I, a young and merry maiden,<br/>
Friend and sister of the fishes,<br/>
Youkahainen’s youngest sister,<br/>
I, the one that thou dost fish for,<br/>
I am Aino whom thou lovest.<br/>
“Once thou wert the wise-tongued hero,<br/>
Now the foolish Wainamoinen,<br/>
Scant of insight, scant of judgment,<br/>
Didst not know enough to keep me,<br/>
Cruel-hearted, bloody-handed,<br/>
Tried to kill me with thy fish-knife,<br/>
So to roast me for thy dinner;<br/>
I, a mermaid of Wellamo,<br/>
Once the fair and lovely Aino,<br/>
Sister dear of Youkahainen.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Filled with sorrow, much regretting:<br/>
“Since thou’rt Youkahainen’s sister,<br/>
Beauteous Aino of Pohyola,<br/>
Come to me again I pray thee!”<br/>
Thus the mermaid wisely answered;<br/>
Nevermore will Aino’s spirit<br/>
Fly to thee and be ill-treated.”<br/>
Quickly dived the water-maiden<br/>
From the surface of the billow<br/>
To the many-colored pebbles,<br/>
To the rainbow-tinted grottoes<br/>
Where the mermaids live and linger.<br/>
Wainamoinen, not discouraged,<br/>
Thought afresh and well reflected,<br/>
How to live, and work, and win her;<br/>
Drew with care his silken fish-net,<br/>
To and fro through foam and billow,<br/>
Through the bays and winding channels,<br/>
Drew it through the placid waters,<br/>
Drew it through the salmon-dwellings,<br/>
Through the homes of water-maidens,<br/>
Through the waters of Wainola,<br/>
Through the blue-back of the ocean,<br/>
Through the lakes of distant Lapland,<br/>
Through the rivers of Youkola,<br/>
Through the seas of Kalevala,<br/>
Hoping thus to find his Aino.<br/>
Many were the fish be landed,<br/>
Every form of fish-like creatures,<br/>
But be did not catch the sea-maid,<br/>
Not Wellamo’s water-maiden,<br/>
Fairest daughter of the Northland.<br/>
Finally the ancient minstrel,<br/>
Mind depressed, and heart discouraged,<br/>
Spake these words, immersed in sorrow:<br/>
“Fool am I, and great my folly,<br/>
Having neither wit nor judgment;<br/>
Surely once I had some knowledge,<br/>
Had some insight into wisdom,<br/>
Had at least a bit of instinct;<br/>
But my virtues all have left me<br/>
In these mournful days of evil,<br/>
Vanished with my youth and vigor,<br/>
Insight gone, and sense departed,<br/>
All my prudence gone to others!<br/>
Aino, whom I love and cherish,<br/>
All these years have sought to honor,<br/>
Aino, now Wellamo’s maiden,<br/>
Promised friend of mine when needed,<br/>
Promised bride of mine forever,<br/>
Once I had within my power,<br/>
Caught her in Wellamo’s grottoes,<br/>
Led her to my boat of copper,<br/>
With my fish-line made of silver;<br/>
But alas! I could not keep her,<br/>
Did not know that I had caught her<br/>
Till too late to woo and win her;<br/>
Let her slip between my fingers<br/>
To the home of water-maidens,<br/>
To the kingdom of Wellamo.”<br/>
Wainamoinen then departed,<br/>
Empty-handed, heavy-hearted,<br/>
Straightway hastened to his country,<br/>
To his home in Kalevala,<br/>
Spake these words upon his journey:<br/>
“What has happened to the cuckoo,<br/>
Once the cuckoo bringing gladness,<br/>
In the morning, in the evening,<br/>
Often bringing joy at noontide?<br/>
What has stilled the cuckoo’s singing,<br/>
What has changed the cuckoo’s calling?<br/>
Sorrow must have stilled his singing,<br/>
And compassion changed his calling,<br/>
As I hear him sing no longer,<br/>
For my pleasure in the morning,<br/>
For my happiness at evening.<br/>
Never shall I learn the secret,<br/>
How to live and how to prosper,<br/>
How upon the earth to rest me,<br/>
How upon the seas to wander!<br/>
Only were my ancient mother<br/>
Living on the face of Northland,<br/>
Surely she would well advise me,<br/>
What my thought and what my action,<br/>
That this cup of grief might pass me,<br/>
That this sorrow might escape me,<br/>
And this darkened cloud pass over.”<br/>
In the deep awoke his mother,<br/>
From her tomb she spake as follows:<br/>
“Only sleeping was thy mother,<br/>
Now awakes to give thee answer,<br/>
What thy thought and what thine action,<br/>
That this cup of grief may pass thee,<br/>
That this sorrow may escape thee,<br/>
And this darkened cloud pass over.<br/>
Hie thee straightway to the Northland,<br/>
Visit thou the Suomi daughters;<br/>
Thou wilt find them wise and lovely,<br/>
Far more beautiful than Aino,<br/>
Far more worthy of a husband,<br/>
Not such silly chatter-boxes,<br/>
As the fickle Lapland maidens.<br/>
Take for thee a life-companion,<br/>
From the honest homes of Suomi,<br/>
One of Northland’s honest daughters;<br/>
She will charm thee with her sweetness,<br/>
Make thee happy through her goodness,<br/>
Form perfection, manners easy,<br/>
Every step and movement graceful,<br/>
Full of wit and good behavior,<br/>
Honor to thy home and kindred.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap06"/>RUNE VI.<br/>
WAINAMOINEN’S HAPLESS JOURNEY.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Now arranges for a journey<br/>
To the village of the Northland,<br/>
To the land of cruel winters,<br/>
To the land of little sunshine,<br/>
To the land of worthy women;<br/>
Takes his light-foot, royal racer,<br/>
Then adjusts the golden bridle,<br/>
Lays upon his back the saddle,<br/>
Silver-buckled, copper-stirruped,<br/>
Seats himself upon his courser,<br/>
And begins his journey northward;<br/>
Plunges onward, onward, onward,<br/>
Galloping along the highway,<br/>
In his saddle, gaily fashioned,<br/>
On his dappled steed of magic,<br/>
Plunging through Wainola’s meadows,<br/>
O’er the plains of Kalevala.<br/>
Fast and far he galloped onward,<br/>
Galloped far beyond Wainola,<br/>
Bounded o’er the waste of waters,<br/>
Till he reached the blue-sea’s margin,<br/>
Wetting not the hoofs in running.<br/>
But the evil Youkahainen<br/>
Nursed a grudge within his bosom,<br/>
In his heart the worm of envy,<br/>
Envy of this Wainamoinen,<br/>
Of this wonderful enchanter.<br/>
He prepares a cruel cross-bow,<br/>
Made of steel and other metals,<br/>
Paints the bow in many colors,<br/>
Molds the top-piece out or copper,<br/>
Trims his bow with snowy silver,<br/>
Gold he uses too in trimming,<br/>
Then he hunts for strongest sinews,<br/>
Finds them in the stag of Hisi,<br/>
Interweaves the flax of Lempo.<br/>
Ready is the cruel cross-bow,<br/>
String, and shaft, and ends are finished,<br/>
Beautiful the bow and mighty,<br/>
Surely cost it not a trifle;<br/>
On the back a painted courser,<br/>
On each end a colt of beauty,<br/>
Near the curve a maiden sleeping<br/>
Near the notch a hare is bounding,<br/>
Wonderful the bow thus fashioned;<br/>
Cuts some arrows for his quiver,<br/>
Covers them with finest feathers,<br/>
From the oak the shafts be fashions,<br/>
Makes the tips of keenest metal.<br/>
As the rods and points are finished,<br/>
Then he feathers well his arrows<br/>
From the plumage of the swallow,<br/>
From the wing-quills of the sparrow;<br/>
Hardens well his feathered arrows,<br/>
And imparts to each new virtues,<br/>
Steeps them in the blood of serpents,<br/>
In the virus of the adder.<br/>
Ready now are all his arrows,<br/>
Ready strung, his cruel cross-bow.<br/>
Waiting for wise Wainamoinen.<br/>
Youkahainen, Lapland’s minstrel,<br/>
Waits a long time, is not weary,<br/>
Hopes to spy the ancient singer;<br/>
Spies at day-dawn, spies at evening,<br/>
Spies he ceaselessly at noontide,<br/>
Lies in wait for the magician,<br/>
Waits, and watches, as in envy;<br/>
Sits he at the open window,<br/>
Stands behind the hedge, and watches<br/>
In the foot-path waits, and listens,<br/>
Spies along the balks of meadows;<br/>
On his back he hangs his quiver,<br/>
In his quiver, feathered arrows<br/>
Dipped in virus of the viper,<br/>
On his arm the mighty cross-bow,<br/>
Waits, and watches, and unwearied,<br/>
Listens from the boat-house window,<br/>
Lingers at the end of Fog-point,<br/>
By the river flowing seaward,<br/>
Near the holy stream and whirlpool,<br/>
Near the sacred river’s fire-fall.<br/>
Finally the Lapland minstrel,<br/>
Youkahainen of Pohyola,<br/>
At the breaking of the day-dawn,<br/>
At the early hour of morning,<br/>
Fixed his gaze upon the North-east,<br/>
Turned his eyes upon the sunrise,<br/>
Saw a black cloud on the ocean,<br/>
Something blue upon the waters,<br/>
And soliloquized as follows:<br/>
“Are those clouds on the horizon,<br/>
Or perchance the dawn of morning?<br/>
Neither clouds on the horizon,<br/>
Nor the dawning of the morning;<br/>
It is ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
The renowned and wise enchanter,<br/>
Riding on his way to Northland;<br/>
On his steed, the royal racer,<br/>
Magic courser of Wainola.”<br/>
Quickly now young Youkahainen,<br/>
Lapland’s vain and evil minstrel,<br/>
Filled with envy, grasps his cross-bow,<br/>
Makes his bow and arrows ready<br/>
For the death of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Quick his aged mother asked him,<br/>
Spake these words to Youkahainen:<br/>
“For whose slaughter is thy cross-bow,<br/>
For whose heart thy poisoned arrows?”<br/>
Youkahainen thus made answer:<br/>
“I have made this mighty cross-bow,<br/>
Fashioned bow and poisoned arrows<br/>
For the death of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Thus to slay the friend of waters;<br/>
I must shoot the old magician,<br/>
The eternal bard and hero,<br/>
Through the heart, and through the liver,<br/>
Through the head, and through the shoulders,<br/>
With this bow and feathered arrows<br/>
Thus destroy my rival minstrel.”<br/>
Then the aged mother answered,<br/>
Thus reproving, thus forbidding.<br/>
Do not slay good Wainamoinen,<br/>
Ancient hero of the Northland,<br/>
From a noble tribe descended,<br/>
He, my sister’s son, my nephew.<br/>
If thou slayest Wainamoinen,<br/>
Ancient son of Kalevala,<br/>
Then alas! all joy will vanish,<br/>
Perish all our wondrous singing;<br/>
Better on the earth the gladness,<br/>
Better here the magic music,<br/>
Than within the nether regions,<br/>
In the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
In the realm of the departed,<br/>
In the land of the hereafter.”<br/>
Then the youthful Youkahainen<br/>
Thought awhile and well considered,<br/>
Ere he made a final answer.<br/>
With one hand he raised the cross-bow<br/>
But the other seemed to weaken,<br/>
As he drew the cruel bow-string.<br/>
Finally these words he uttered<br/>
As his bosom swelled with envy:<br/>
“Let all joy forever vanish,<br/>
Let earth’s pleasures quickly perish,<br/>
Disappear earth’s sweetest music,<br/>
Happiness depart forever;<br/>
Shoot I will this rival minstrel,<br/>
Little heeding what the end is.”<br/>
Quickly now he bends his fire-bow,<br/>
On his left knee rests the weapon,<br/>
With his right foot firmly planted,<br/>
Thus he strings his bow of envy;<br/>
Takes three arrows from his quiver,<br/>
Choosing well the best among them,<br/>
Carefully adjusts the bow-string,<br/>
Sets with care the feathered arrow,<br/>
To the flaxen string he lays it,<br/>
Holds the cross-bow to his shoulder,<br/>
Aiming well along the margin,<br/>
At the heart of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Waiting till he gallops nearer;<br/>
In the shadow of a thicket,<br/>
Speaks these words while he is waiting<br/>
“Be thou, flaxen string, elastic;<br/>
Swiftly fly, thou feathered ash-wood,<br/>
Swiftly speed, thou deadly missile,<br/>
Quick as light, thou poisoned arrow,<br/>
To the heart of Wainamoinen.<br/>
If my hand too low should hold thee,<br/>
May the gods direct thee higher;<br/>
If too high mine eye should aim thee,<br/>
May the gods direct thee lower.”<br/>
Steady now he pulls the trigger;<br/>
Like the lightning flies the arrow<br/>
O’er the head of Wainamoinen;<br/>
To the upper sky it darteth,<br/>
And the highest clouds it pierces,<br/>
Scatters all the flock of lamb-clouds,<br/>
On its rapid journey skyward.<br/>
Not discouraged, quick selecting,<br/>
Quick adjusting, Youkahainen,<br/>
Quickly aiming shoots a second.<br/>
Speeds the arrow swift as lightning;<br/>
Much too low he aimed the missile,<br/>
Into earth the arrow plunges,<br/>
Pierces to the lower regions,<br/>
Splits in two the old Sand Mountain.<br/>
Nothing daunted, Youkahainen,<br/>
Quick adjusting shoots a third one.<br/>
Swift as light it speeds its journey,<br/>
Strikes the steed of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Strikes the light-foot, ocean-swimmer,<br/>
Strikes him near his golden girdle,<br/>
Through the shoulder of the racer.<br/>
Thereupon wise Wainamoinen<br/>
Headlong fell upon the waters,<br/>
Plunged beneath the rolling billows,<br/>
From the saddle of the courser,<br/>
From his dappled steed of magic.<br/>
Then arose a mighty storm-wind,<br/>
Roaring wildly on the waters,<br/>
Bore away old Wainamoinen<br/>
Far from land upon the billows,<br/>
On the high and rolling billows,<br/>
On the broad sea’s great expanses.<br/>
Boasted then young Youkahainen,<br/>
Thinking Waino dead and buried,<br/>
These the boastful words be uttered:<br/>
“Nevermore, old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Nevermore in all thy life-time,<br/>
While the golden moonlight glistens,<br/>
Nevermore wilt fix thy vision<br/>
On the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
On the plains of Kalevala;<br/>
Full six years must swim the ocean,<br/>
Tread the waves for seven summers,<br/>
Eight years ride the foamy billows,<br/>
In the broad expanse of water;<br/>
Six long autumns as a fir-tree,<br/>
Seven winters as a pebble;<br/>
Eight long summers as an aspen.”<br/>
Thereupon the Lapland minstrel<br/>
Hastened to his room delighting,<br/>
When his mother thus addressed him<br/>
“Hast thou slain good Wainamoinen,<br/>
Slain the son of Kalevala?”<br/>
Youkahainen thus made answer:<br/>
“I have slain old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Slain the son of Kalevala,<br/>
That he now may plow the ocean,<br/>
That he now may sweep the waters,<br/>
On the billows rock and slumber.<br/>
In the salt-sea plunged he headlong,<br/>
In the deep sank the magician,<br/>
Sidewise turned he to the sea-shore<br/>
On his back to rock forever,<br/>
Thus the boundless sea to travel,<br/>
Thus to ride the rolling billows.”<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“Woe to earth for this thine action,<br/>
Gone forever, joy and singing,<br/>
Vanished is the wit of ages!<br/>
Thou hast slain good Wainamoinen.<br/>
Slain the ancient wisdom-singer,<br/>
Slain the pride of Suwantala,<br/>
Slain the hero of Wainola,<br/>
Slain the joy of Kalevala.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap07"/>RUNE VII.<br/>
WAINIOINEN’S RESCUE.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Swam through all the deep-sea waters,<br/>
Floating like a branch of aspen,<br/>
Like a withered twig of willow;<br/>
Swam six days in summer weather,<br/>
Swam six nights in golden moonlight;<br/>
Still before him rose the billows,<br/>
And behind him sky and ocean.<br/>
Two days more he swam undaunted,<br/>
Two long nights be struggled onward.<br/>
On the evening of the eighth day,<br/>
Wainamoinen grew disheartened,<br/>
Felt a very great discomfort,<br/>
For his feet had lost their toe-nails,<br/>
And his fingers dead and dying.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Sad and weary, spake as follows:<br/>
“Woe is me, my old life fated!<br/>
Woe is me, misfortune’s offspring!<br/>
Fool was I when fortune, favored,<br/>
To forsake my home and kindred,<br/>
For a maiden fair and lovely,<br/>
Here beneath the starry heavens,<br/>
In this cruel waste of waters,<br/>
Days and nights to swim and wander,<br/>
Here to struggle with the storm-winds,<br/>
To be tossed by heaving billows,<br/>
In this broad sea’s great expanses,<br/>
In this ocean vast and boundless.<br/>
“Cold my life and sad and dreary,<br/>
Painful too for me to linger<br/>
Evermore within these waters,<br/>
Thus to struggle for existence!<br/>
Cannot know how I can prosper,<br/>
How to find me food and shelter,<br/>
In these cold and lifeless waters,<br/>
In these days of dire misfortune.<br/>
Build I in the winds my dwelling?<br/>
It will find no sure foundation.<br/>
Build my home upon the billows?<br/>
Surely would the waves destroy it.”<br/>
Comes a bird from far Pohyola,<br/>
From the occident, an eagle,<br/>
Is not classed among the largest,<br/>
Nor belongs he to the smallest;<br/>
One wing touches on the waters,<br/>
While the other sweeps the heavens;<br/>
O’er the waves he wings his body,<br/>
Strikes his beak upon the sea-cliffs,<br/>
Flies about, then safely perches,<br/>
Looks before him, looks behind him,<br/>
There beholds brave Wainamoinen,<br/>
On the blue-back of the ocean,<br/>
And the eagle thus accosts him:<br/>
“Wherefore art thou, ancient hero,<br/>
Swimming in the deep-sea billows?<br/>
Thus the water-minstrel answered:<br/>
“I am ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Friend and fellow of the waters<br/>
I, the famous wisdom-singer;<br/>
Went to woo a Northland maiden,<br/>
Maiden from the dismal Darkland,<br/>
Quickly galloped on my journey,<br/>
Riding on the plain of ocean.<br/>
I arrived one morning early,<br/>
At the breaking of the day-dawn.<br/>
At the bay of Luotola,<br/>
Near Youkola’s foaming river,<br/>
Where the evil Youkahainen<br/>
Slew my steed with bow and arrow,<br/>
Tried to slay me with his weapons.<br/>
On the waters fell I headlong,<br/>
Plunged beneath the salt-sea’s surface,<br/>
From the saddle of the courser,<br/>
From my dappled steed of magic.<br/>
“Then arose a mighty storm-wind,<br/>
From the East and West a whirlwind,<br/>
Washed me seaward on the surges,<br/>
Seaward, seaward, further, further,<br/>
Where for many days I wandered,<br/>
Swam and rocked upon the billows,<br/>
Where as many nights I struggled,<br/>
In the dashing waves and sea-foam,<br/>
With the angry winds and waters.<br/>
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!<br/>
Cannot solve this heavy problem,<br/>
How to live nor how to perish<br/>
In this cruel salt-sea water.<br/>
Build I in the winds my dwelling?<br/>
It will find no sure foundation.<br/>
Build my home upon the waters?<br/>
Surely will the waves destroy it.<br/>
Must I swim the sea forever,<br/>
Must I live, or must I perish?<br/>
What will happen if I perish,<br/>
If I sink below the billows,<br/>
Perish here from cold and hunger?”<br/>
Thus the bird of Ether answered<br/>
“Be not in the least disheartened,<br/>
Place thyself between my shoulders,<br/>
On my back be firmly seated,<br/>
I will lift thee from the waters,<br/>
Bear thee with my pinions upward,<br/>
Bear thee wheresoe’er thou willest.<br/>
Well do I the day remember<br/>
Where thou didst the eagle service,<br/>
When thou didst the birds a favor.<br/>
Thou didst leave the birch-tree standing,<br/>
When were cleared the Osmo-forests,<br/>
From the lands of Kalevala,<br/>
As a home for weary song-birds,<br/>
As a resting-place for eagles.”<br/>
Then arises Wainamoinen,<br/>
Lifts his head above the waters,<br/>
Boldly rises from the sea-waves,<br/>
Lifts his body from the billows,<br/>
Seats himself upon the eagle,<br/>
On the eagle’s feathered shoulders.<br/>
Quick aloft the huge bird bears him,<br/>
Bears the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Bears him on the path of zephyrs,<br/>
Floating on the vernal breezes,<br/>
To the distant shore of Northland,<br/>
To the dismal Sariola,<br/>
Where the eagle leaves his burden,<br/>
Flies away to join his fellows.<br/>
Wainamoinen, lone and weary,<br/>
Straightway fell to bitter weeping,<br/>
Wept and moaned in heavy accents,<br/>
On the border of the blue-sea.<br/>
On a cheerless promontory,<br/>
With a hundred wounds tormented,<br/>
Made by cruel winds and waters,<br/>
With his hair and beard dishevelled<br/>
By the surging of the billows.<br/>
Three long days he wept disheartened<br/>
Wept as many nights in anguish,<br/>
Did not know what way to journey,<br/>
Could not find a woodland foot-print,<br/>
That would point him to the highway,<br/>
To his home in Kalevala,<br/>
To his much-loved home and kindred.<br/>
Northland’s young and slender maiden,<br/>
With complexion fair and lovely,<br/>
With the Sun had laid a wager,<br/>
With the Sun and Moon a wager,<br/>
Which should rise before the other,<br/>
On the morning of the morrow.<br/>
And the maiden rose in beauty,<br/>
Long before the Sun had risen,<br/>
Long before the Moon bad wakened,<br/>
From their beds beneath the ocean.<br/>
Ere the cock had crowed the day-break,<br/>
Ere the Sun had broken slumber<br/>
She had sheared six gentle lambkins,<br/>
Gathered from them six white fleeces,<br/>
Hence to make the rolls for spinning,<br/>
Hence to form the threads for weaving,<br/>
Hence to make the softest raiment,<br/>
Ere the morning dawn had broken,<br/>
Ere the sleeping Sun had risen.<br/>
When this task the maid had ended,<br/>
Then she scrubbed the birchen tables,<br/>
Sweeps the ground-floor of the stable,<br/>
With a broom of leaves and branches<br/>
From the birches of the Northland,<br/>
Scrapes the sweepings well together<br/>
On a shovel made of copper,<br/>
Carries them beyond the stable,<br/>
From the doorway to the meadow,<br/>
To the meadow’s distant border,<br/>
Near the surges of the great-sea,<br/>
Listens there and looks about her,<br/>
Hears a wailing from the waters,<br/>
Hears a weeping from the sea-shore,<br/>
Hears a hero-voice lamenting.<br/>
Thereupon she hastens homeward,<br/>
Hastens to her mother’s dwelling,<br/>
These the words the maiden utters:<br/>
“I have heard a wail from ocean,<br/>
Heard a weeping from the sea-coast,<br/>
On the shore some one lamenting.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Ancient, toothless dame of Northland,<br/>
Hastens from her door and court-yard,<br/>
Through the meadow to the sea-shore,<br/>
Listens well for sounds of weeping,<br/>
For the wail of one in sorrow;<br/>
Hears the voice of one in trouble,<br/>
Hears a hero-cry of anguish.<br/>
Thus the ancient Louhi answers:<br/>
“This is not the wail of children,<br/>
These are not the tears of women,<br/>
In this way weep bearded heroes;<br/>
This the hero-cry of anguish.”<br/>
Quick she pushed her boat to water,<br/>
To the floods her goodly vessel,<br/>
Straightway rows with lightning swiftness,<br/>
To the weeping Wainamoinen;<br/>
Gives the hero consolation,<br/>
Comfort gives she to the minstrel<br/>
Wailing in a grove of willows,<br/>
In his piteous condition,<br/>
Mid the alder-trees and aspens,<br/>
On the border of the salt-sea,<br/>
Visage trembling, locks dishevelled.<br/>
Ears, and eyes, and lips of sadness.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Thus addresses Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Tell me what has been thy folly,<br/>
That thou art in this condition.”<br/>
Old and truthful Wainamoinen<br/>
Lifts aloft his bead and answers:<br/>
“Well I know that it is folly<br/>
That has brought me all this trouble,<br/>
Brought me to this land of strangers,<br/>
To these regions unbefitting<br/>
Happy was I with my kindred,<br/>
In my distant home and country,<br/>
There my name was named in honor.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Thus replied to Wainamoinen:<br/>
“I would gain the information,<br/>
Should I be allowed to ask thee,<br/>
Who thou art of ancient heroes,<br/>
Who of all the host of heroes?<br/>
This is Wainamoinen’s answer:<br/>
“Formerly my name was mentioned,<br/>
Often was I heard and honored,<br/>
As a minstrel and magician,<br/>
In the long and dreary winters,<br/>
Called the Singer of the Northland,<br/>
In the valleys of Wainola,<br/>
On the plains of Kalevala;<br/>
No one thought that such misfortune<br/>
Could befall wise Wainamoinen.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Thus replied in cheering accents<br/>
“Rise, O hero, from discomfort,<br/>
From thy bed among the willows;<br/>
Enter now upon the new-way,<br/>
Come with me to yonder dwelling,<br/>
There relate thy strange adventures,<br/>
Tell the tale of thy misfortunes.”<br/>
Now she takes the hapless hero,<br/>
Lifts him from his bed of sorrow,<br/>
In her boat she safely seats him,<br/>
And begins at once her rowing,<br/>
Rows with steady hand and mighty<br/>
To her home upon the sea-shore,<br/>
To the dwellings of Pohyola.<br/>
There she feeds the starving hero,<br/>
Rests the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Gives him warmth, and food, and shelter,<br/>
And the hero soon recovers.<br/>
Then the hostess of Pohyola<br/>
Questioned thus the ancient singer:<br/>
“Wherefore didst thou, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Friend and fellow of the waters,<br/>
Weep in sad and bitter accents,<br/>
On the border of the ocean,<br/>
Mid the aspens and the willows?”<br/>
This is Wainamoinen’s answer:<br/>
Had good reason for my weeping,<br/>
Cause enough for all my sorrow;<br/>
Long indeed had I been swimming,<br/>
Had been buffeting the billows,<br/>
In the far outstretching waters.<br/>
This the reason for my weeping;<br/>
I have lived in toil and torture,<br/>
Since I left my home and country,<br/>
Left my native land and kindred,<br/>
Came to this the land of strangers,<br/>
To these unfamiliar portals.<br/>
All thy trees have thorns to wound me,<br/>
All thy branches, spines to pierce me,<br/>
Even birches give me trouble,<br/>
And the alders bring discomfort,<br/>
My companions, winds and waters,<br/>
Only does the Sun seem friendly,<br/>
In this cold and cruel country,<br/>
Near these unfamiliar portals.”<br/>
Louhi thereupon made answer,<br/>
Weep no longer, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Grieve no more, thou friend of waters,<br/>
Good for thee, that thou shouldst linger<br/>
At our friendly homes and firesides;<br/>
Thou shalt live with us and welcome,<br/>
Thou shalt sit at all our tables,<br/>
Eat the salmon from our platters,<br/>
Eat the sweetest of our bacon,<br/>
Eat the whiting from our waters.”<br/>
Answers thus old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Grateful for the invitation:<br/>
“Never do I court strange tables,<br/>
Though the food be rare and toothsome;<br/>
One’s own country is the dearest,<br/>
One’s own table is the sweetest,<br/>
One’s own home, the most attractive.<br/>
Grant, kind Ukko, God above me,<br/>
Thou Creator, full of mercy,<br/>
Grant that I again may visit<br/>
My beloved home and country.<br/>
Better dwell in one’s own country,<br/>
There to drink Its healthful waters<br/>
From the simple cups of birch-wood,<br/>
Than in foreign lands to wander,<br/>
There to drink the rarest liquors<br/>
From the golden bowls of strangers.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Thus replied to the magician:<br/>
“What reward wilt thou award me,<br/>
Should I take thee where thou willest,<br/>
To thy native land and kindred,<br/>
To thy much-loved home and fireside,<br/>
To the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala?”<br/>
These the words of Wainamoinen:<br/>
“What would be reward sufficient,<br/>
Shouldst thou take me to my people,<br/>
To my home and distant country,<br/>
To the borders of the Northland,<br/>
There to hear the cuckoo singing,<br/>
Hear the sacred cuckoo calling?<br/>
Shall I give thee golden treasures,<br/>
Fill thy cups with finest silver?”<br/>
This is Louhi’s simple answer:<br/>
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Only true and wise magician,<br/>
Never will I ask for riches,<br/>
Never ask for gold nor silver;<br/>
Gold is for the children’s flowers,<br/>
Silver for the stallion’s jewels.<br/>
Canst thou forge for me the Sampo,<br/>
Hammer me the lid in colors,<br/>
From the tips of white-swan feathers<br/>
From the milk of greatest virtue,<br/>
From a single grain of barley,<br/>
From the finest wool of lambkins?<br/>
“I will give thee too my daughter,<br/>
Will reward thee through the maiden,<br/>
Take thee to thy much-loved home-land,<br/>
To the borders of Wainola,<br/>
There to hear the cuckoo singing,<br/>
Hear the sacred cuckoo calling.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, much regretting,<br/>
Gave this answer to her question:<br/>
“Cannot forge for thee the Sampo,<br/>
Cannot make the lid in colors.<br/>
Take me to my distant country,<br/>
I will send thee Ilmarinen,<br/>
He will forge for thee the Sampo,<br/>
Hammer thee the lid in colors,<br/>
He may win thy lovely maiden;<br/>
Worthy smith is Ilmarinen,<br/>
In this art is first and master;<br/>
He, the one that forged the heavens.<br/>
Forged the air a hollow cover;<br/>
Nowhere see we hammer-traces,<br/>
Nowhere find a single tongs-mark.”<br/>
Thus replied the hostess, Louhi:<br/>
“Him alone I’ll give my daughter,<br/>
Promise him my child in marriage,<br/>
Who for me will forge the Sampo,<br/>
Hammer me the lid in colors,<br/>
From the tips of white-swan feathers,<br/>
From the milk of greatest virtue,<br/>
From a single grain of barley,<br/>
From the finest wool of lambkins.”<br/>
Thereupon the hostess Louhi,<br/>
Harnessed quick a dappled courser,<br/>
Hitched him to her sledge of birch-wood,<br/>
Placed within it Wainamoinen,<br/>
Placed the hero on the cross-bench,<br/>
Made him ready for his journey;<br/>
Then addressed the ancient minstrel,<br/>
These the words that Louhi uttered:<br/>
“Do not raise thine eyes to heaven,<br/>
Look not upward on thy journey,<br/>
While thy steed is fresh and frisky,<br/>
While the day-star lights thy pathway,<br/>
Ere the evening star has risen;<br/>
If thine eyes be lifted upward,<br/>
While the day-star lights thy pathway,<br/>
Dire misfortune will befall thee,<br/>
Some sad fate will overtake thee.”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Fleetly drove upon his journey,<br/>
Merrily he hastened homeward,<br/>
Hastened homeward, happy-hearted<br/>
From the ever-darksome Northland<br/>
From the dismal Sariola.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap08"/>RUNE VIII.<br/>
MAIDEN OF THE RAINBOW.</h2>
<p>Pohyola’s fair and winsome daughter,<br/>
Glory of the land and water,<br/>
Sat upon the bow of heaven,<br/>
On its highest arch resplendent,<br/>
In a gown of richest fabric,<br/>
In a gold and silver air-gown,<br/>
Weaving webs of golden texture,<br/>
Interlacing threads of silver;<br/>
Weaving with a golden shuttle,<br/>
With a weaving-comb of silver;<br/>
Merrily flies the golden shuttle,<br/>
From the maiden’s nimble fingers,<br/>
Briskly swings the lathe in weaving,<br/>
Swiftly flies the comb of silver,<br/>
From the sky-born maiden’s fingers,<br/>
Weaving webs of wondrous beauty.<br/>
Came the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Driving down the highway homeward,<br/>
From the ever sunless Northland,<br/>
From the dismal Sariola;<br/>
Few the furlongs he had driven,<br/>
Driven but a little distance,<br/>
When he heard the sky-loom buzzing,<br/>
As the maiden plied the shuttle.<br/>
Quick the thoughtless Wainamoinen<br/>
Lifts his eyes aloft in wonder,<br/>
Looks upon the vault of heaven,<br/>
There beholds the bow of beauty,<br/>
On the bow the maiden sitting,<br/>
Beauteous Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Glory of the earth and ocean,<br/>
Weaving there a golden fabric,<br/>
Working with the rustling silver.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Quickly checks his fleet-foot racer,<br/>
Looks upon the charming maiden,<br/>
Then addresses her as follows:<br/>
“Come, fair maiden, to my snow-sledge,<br/>
By my side I wish thee seated.”<br/>
Thus the Maid of Beauty answers:<br/>
“Tell me what thou wishest of me,<br/>
Should I join thee in the snow-sledge.”<br/>
Speaks the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Answers thus the Maid of Beauty:<br/>
“This the reason for thy coming:<br/>
Thou shalt bake me honey-biscuit,<br/>
Shalt prepare me barley-water,<br/>
Thou shalt fill my foaming beer-cups,<br/>
Thou shalt sing beside my table,<br/>
Shalt rejoice within my portals,<br/>
Walk a queen within my dwelling,<br/>
In the Wainola halls and chambers,<br/>
In the courts of Kalevala.”<br/>
Thus the Maid of Beauty answered<br/>
From her throne amid the heavens:<br/>
“Yesterday at hour of twilight,<br/>
Went I to the flowery meadows,<br/>
There to rock upon the common,<br/>
Where the Sun retires to slumber;<br/>
There I heard a song-bird singing,<br/>
Heard the thrush simple measures,<br/>
Singing sweetly thoughts of maidens,<br/>
And the minds of anxious mothers.<br/>
“Then I asked the pretty songster,<br/>
Asked the thrush this simple question:<br/>
‘Sing to me, thou pretty song-bird,<br/>
Sing that I may understand thee,<br/>
Sing to me in truthful accents,<br/>
How to live in greatest pleasure,<br/>
And in happiness the sweetest,<br/>
As a maiden with her father,<br/>
Or as wife beside her husband.’<br/>
“Thus the song-bird gave me answer,<br/>
Sang the thrush this information:<br/>
‘Bright and warm are days of summer,<br/>
Warmer still is maiden-freedom;<br/>
Cold is iron in the winter,<br/>
Thus the lives of married women;<br/>
Maidens living with their mothers<br/>
Are like ripe and ruddy berries;<br/>
Married women, far too many,<br/>
Are like dogs enchained in kennel,<br/>
Rarely do they ask for favors,<br/>
Not to wives are favors given.’”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Answers thus the Maid of Beauty:<br/>
“Foolish is the thrush thus singing,<br/>
Nonsense is the song-bird’s twitter;<br/>
Like to babes are maidens treated,<br/>
Wives are queens and highly honored.<br/>
Come, sweet maiden, to my snow-sledge,<br/>
I am not despised as hero,<br/>
Not the meanest of magicians;<br/>
Come with me and I will make thee<br/>
Wife and queen in Kalevala.”<br/>
Thus the Maid of Beauty answered—<br/>
“Would consider thee a hero,<br/>
Mighty hero, I would call thee,<br/>
When a golden hair thou splittest,<br/>
Using knives that have no edges;<br/>
When thou snarest me a bird’s egg<br/>
With a snare that I can see not.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, skilled and ancient,<br/>
Split a golden hair exactly,<br/>
Using knives that had no edges;<br/>
And he snared an egg as nicely<br/>
With a snare the maiden saw not.<br/>
“Come, sweet maiden, to my snow-sledge,<br/>
I have done what thou desirest.”<br/>
Thus the maiden wisely answered:<br/>
“Never enter I thy snow-sledge,<br/>
Till thou peelest me the sandstone,<br/>
Till thou cuttest me a whip-stick<br/>
From the ice, and make no splinters,<br/>
Losing not the smallest fragment.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, true magician,<br/>
Nothing daunted, not discouraged,<br/>
Deftly peeled the rounded sandstone,<br/>
Deftly cut from ice a whip-stick,<br/>
Cutting not the finest splinter,<br/>
Losing not the smallest fragment.<br/>
Then again be called the maiden,<br/>
To a seat within his snow-sledge.<br/>
But the Maid or Beauty answered,<br/>
Answered thus the great magician:<br/>
I will go with that one only<br/>
That will make me ship or shallop,<br/>
From the splinters of my spindle,<br/>
From the fragments of my distaff,<br/>
In the waters launch the vessel,<br/>
Set the little ship a-floating,<br/>
Using not the knee to push it,<br/>
Using not the arm to move it,<br/>
Using not the hand to touch it,<br/>
Using not the foot to turn it,<br/>
Using nothing to propel it.”<br/>
Spake the skilful Wainamoinen,<br/>
These the words the hero uttered:<br/>
“There is no one in the Northland,<br/>
No one under vault of heaven,<br/>
Who like me can build a vessel,<br/>
From the fragments of the distaff,<br/>
From the splinters of the spindle.”<br/>
Then he took the distaff-fragments,<br/>
Took the splinters of the spindle,<br/>
Hastened off the boat to fashion,<br/>
Hastened to an iron mountain,<br/>
There to join the many fragments.<br/>
Full of zeal be plies the hammer,<br/>
Swings the hammer and the hatchet;<br/>
Nothing daunted, builds the vessel,<br/>
Works one day and then a second,<br/>
Works with steady hand the third day;<br/>
On the evening of the third day,<br/>
Evil Hisi grasps the hatchet,<br/>
Lempo takes the crooked handle,<br/>
Turns aside the axe in falling,<br/>
Strikes the rocks and breaks to pieces;<br/>
From the rocks rebound the fragments,<br/>
Pierce the flesh of the magician,<br/>
Cut the knee of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Lempo guides the sharpened hatchet,<br/>
And the veins fell Hisi severs.<br/>
Quickly gushes forth a blood-stream,<br/>
And the stream is crimson-colored.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
The renowned and wise enchanter,<br/>
Thus outspeaks in measured accents:<br/>
“O thou keen and cruel hatchet,<br/>
O thou axe of sharpened metal,<br/>
Thou shouldst cut the trees to fragments,<br/>
Cut the pine-tree and the willow,<br/>
Cut the alder and the birch-tree,<br/>
Cut the juniper and aspen,<br/>
Shouldst not cut my knee to pieces,<br/>
Shouldst not tear my veins asunder.”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Thus begins his incantations,<br/>
Thus begins his magic singing,<br/>
Of the origin of evil;<br/>
Every word in perfect order,<br/>
Makes no effort to remember,<br/>
Sings the origin of iron,<br/>
That a bolt he well may fashion,<br/>
Thus prepare a look for surety,<br/>
For the wounds the axe has given,<br/>
That the hatchet has torn open.<br/>
But the stream flows like a brooklet,<br/>
Rushing like a maddened torrent,<br/>
Stains the herbs upon the meadows,<br/>
Scarcely is a bit of verdure<br/>
That the blood-stream does not cover<br/>
As it flows and rushes onward<br/>
From the knee of the magician,<br/>
From the veins of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Now the wise and ancient minstrel<br/>
Gathers lichens from the sandstone,<br/>
Picks them from the trunks of birches,<br/>
Gathers moss within the marshes,<br/>
Pulls the grasses from the meadows,<br/>
Thus to stop the crimson streamlet,<br/>
Thus to close the wounds laid open;<br/>
But his work is unsuccessful,<br/>
And the crimson stream flows onward.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Feeling pain and fearing languor,<br/>
Falls to weeping, heavy-hearted;<br/>
Quickly now his steed he hitches,<br/>
Hitches to the sledge of birch-wood,<br/>
Climbs with pain upon the cross-bench,<br/>
Strikes his steed in quick succession,<br/>
Snaps his whip above the racer,<br/>
And the steed flies onward swiftly;<br/>
Like the winds he sweeps the highway,<br/>
Till be nears a Northland village,<br/>
Where the way is triple-parted.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Takes the lowest of the highways,<br/>
Quickly nears a spacious cottage,<br/>
Quickly asks before the doorway:<br/>
“Is there any one here dwelling,<br/>
That can know the pain I suffer,<br/>
That can heal this wound of hatchet.<br/>
That can check this crimson streamlet?”<br/>
Sat a boy within a corner,<br/>
On a bench beside a baby,<br/>
And he answered thus the hero:<br/>
“There is no one in this dwelling<br/>
That can know the pain thou feelest,<br/>
That can heal the wounds of hatchet,<br/>
That can check the crimson streamlet;<br/>
Some one lives in yonder cottage,<br/>
That perchance can do thee service.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Whips his courser to a gallop,<br/>
Dashes on along the highway;<br/>
Only drives a little distance,<br/>
On the middle of the highways,<br/>
To a cabin on the road-side,<br/>
Asks one standing on the threshold,<br/>
Questions all through open windows,<br/>
These the words the hero uses:<br/>
“Is there no one in this cabin,<br/>
That can know the pain I suffer,<br/>
That can heal this wound of hatchet,<br/>
That can check this crimson streamlet?”<br/>
On the floor a witch was lying,<br/>
Near the fire-place lay the beldame,<br/>
Thus she spake to Wainamoinen,<br/>
Through her rattling teeth she answered.<br/>
“There is no one in this cabin<br/>
That can know the pain thou feelest,<br/>
That can heal the wounds of hatchets,<br/>
That can check the crimson streamlet;<br/>
Some one lives in yonder cottage,<br/>
That perchance can do thee service.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, nothing daunted,<br/>
Whips his racer to a gallop,<br/>
Dashes on along the highway;<br/>
Only drives a little distance,<br/>
On the upper of the highways,<br/>
Gallops to a humble cottage,<br/>
Asks one standing near the penthouse,<br/>
Sitting on the penthouse-doorsill:<br/>
“Is there no one in this cottage,<br/>
That can know the pain I suffer,<br/>
That can heal this wound of hatchet,<br/>
That can check this crimson streamlet?”<br/>
Near the fireplace sat an old man,<br/>
On the hearthstone sat the gray-beard,<br/>
Thus he answered Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Greater things have been accomplished,<br/>
Much more wondrous things effected,<br/>
Through but three words of the master;<br/>
Through the telling of the causes,<br/>
Streams and oceans have been tempered,<br/>
River cataracts been lessened,<br/>
Bays been made of promontories,<br/>
Islands raised from deep sea-bottoms.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap09"/>RUNE IX.<br/>
ORIGIN OF IRON.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, thus encouraged,<br/>
Quickly rises in his snow-sledge,<br/>
Asking no one for assistance,<br/>
Straightway hastens to the cottage,<br/>
Takes a seat within the dwelling.<br/>
Come two maids with silver pitchers,<br/>
Bringing also golden goblets;<br/>
Dip they up a very little,<br/>
But the very smallest measure<br/>
Of the blood of the magician,<br/>
From the wounds of Wainamoinen.<br/>
From the fire-place calls the old man,<br/>
Thus the gray-beard asks the minstrel:<br/>
“Tell me who thou art of heroes,<br/>
Who of all the great magicians?<br/>
Lo! thy blood fills seven sea-boats,<br/>
Eight of largest birchen vessels,<br/>
Flowing from some hero’s veinlets,<br/>
From the wounds of some magician.<br/>
Other matters I would ask thee;<br/>
Sing the cause of this thy trouble,<br/>
Sing to me the source of metals,<br/>
Sing the origin of iron,<br/>
How at first it was created.”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Made this answer to the gray-beard:<br/>
“Know I well the source of metals,<br/>
Know the origin of iron;<br/>
f can tell bow steel is fashioned.<br/>
Of the mothers air is oldest,<br/>
Water is the oldest brother,<br/>
And the fire is second brother,<br/>
And the youngest brother, iron;<br/>
Ukko is the first creator.<br/>
Ukko, maker of the heavens,<br/>
Cut apart the air and water,<br/>
Ere was born the metal, iron.<br/>
Ukko, maker of the heavens,<br/>
Firmly rubbed his hands together,<br/>
Firmly pressed them on his knee-cap,<br/>
Then arose three lovely maidens,<br/>
Three most beautiful of daughters;<br/>
These were mothers of the iron,<br/>
And of steel of bright-blue color.<br/>
Tremblingly they walked the heavens,<br/>
Walked the clouds with silver linings,<br/>
With their bosoms overflowing<br/>
With the milk of future iron,<br/>
Flowing on and flowing ever,<br/>
From the bright rims of the cloudlets<br/>
To the earth, the valleys filling,<br/>
To the slumber-calling waters.<br/>
“Ukko’s eldest daughter sprinkled<br/>
Black milk over river channels<br/>
And the second daughter sprinkled<br/>
White milk over hills and mountains,<br/>
While the youngest daughter sprinkled<br/>
Red milk over seas and oceans.<br/>
Whero the black milk had been sprinked,<br/>
Grew the dark and ductile iron;<br/>
Where the white milk had been sprinkled.<br/>
Grew the iron, lighter-colored;<br/>
Where the red milk had been sprinkled,<br/>
Grew the red and brittle iron.<br/>
“After Time had gone a distance,<br/>
Iron hastened Fire to visit,<br/>
His beloved elder brother,<br/>
Thus to know his brother better.<br/>
Straightway Fire began his roarings,<br/>
Labored to consume his brother,<br/>
His beloved younger brother.<br/>
Straightway Iron sees his danger,<br/>
Saves himself by fleetly fleeing,<br/>
From the fiery flame’s advances,<br/>
Fleeing hither, fleeing thither,<br/>
Fleeing still and taking shelter<br/>
In the swamps and in the valleys,<br/>
In the springs that loudly bubble,<br/>
By the rivers winding seaward,<br/>
On the broad backs of the marshes,<br/>
Where the swans their nests have builded,<br/>
Where the wild geese hatch their goslings.<br/>
“Thus is iron in the swamp-lands,<br/>
Stretching by the water-courses,<br/>
Hidden well for many ages,<br/>
Hidden in the birchen forests,<br/>
But he could not hide forever<br/>
From the searchings of his brother;<br/>
Here and there the fire has caught him,<br/>
Caught and brought him to his furnace,<br/>
That the spears, and swords, and axes,<br/>
Might be forged and duly hammered.<br/>
In the swamps ran blackened waters,<br/>
From the heath the bears came ambling,<br/>
And the wolves ran through the marshes.<br/>
Iron then made his appearance,<br/>
Where the feet of wolves had trodden,<br/>
Where the paws of bears had trampled.<br/>
“Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Came to earth to work the metal;<br/>
He was born upon the Coal-mount,<br/>
Skilled and nurtured in the coal-fields;<br/>
In one hand, a copper hammer,<br/>
In the other, tongs of iron;<br/>
In the night was born the blacksmith,<br/>
In the morn he built his smithy,<br/>
Sought with care a favored hillock,<br/>
Where the winds might fill his bellows;<br/>
Found a hillock in the swamp-lands,<br/>
Where the iron hid abundant;<br/>
There he built his smelting furnace,<br/>
There he laid his leathern bellows,<br/>
Hastened where the wolves had travelled,<br/>
Followed where the bears had trampled,<br/>
Found the iron’s young formations,<br/>
In the wolf-tracks of the marshes,<br/>
In the foot-prints of the gray-bear.<br/>
“Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
‘Thus addressed the sleeping iron:<br/>
Thou most useful of the metals,<br/>
Thou art sleeping in the marshes,<br/>
Thou art hid in low conditions,<br/>
Where the wolf treads in the swamp-lands,<br/>
Where the bear sleeps in the thickets.<br/>
Hast thou thought and well considered,<br/>
What would be thy future station,<br/>
Should I place thee in the furnace,<br/>
Thus to make thee free and useful?’<br/>
“Then was Iron sorely frightened,<br/>
Much distressed and filled with horror,<br/>
When of Fire he heard the mention,<br/>
Mention of his fell destroyer.<br/>
“Then again speaks Ilmarinen,<br/>
Thus the smith addresses Iron:<br/>
‘Be not frightened, useful metal,<br/>
Surely Fire will not consume thee,<br/>
Will not burn his youngest brother,<br/>
Will not harm his nearest kindred.<br/>
Come thou to my room and furnace,<br/>
Where the fire is freely burning,<br/>
Thou wilt live, and grow, and prosper,<br/>
Wilt become the swords of heroes,<br/>
Buckles for the belts of women.’<br/>
“Ere arose the star of evening,<br/>
Iron ore had left the marshes,<br/>
From the water-beds had risen,<br/>
Had been carried to the furnace,<br/>
In the fire the smith had laid it,<br/>
Laid it in his smelting furnace.<br/>
Ilmarinen starts the bellows,<br/>
Gives three motions of the handle,<br/>
And the iron flows in streamlets<br/>
From the forge of the magician,<br/>
Soon becomes like baker’s leaven,<br/>
Soft as dough for bread of barley.<br/>
Then out-screamed the metal, Iron:<br/>
‘Wondrous blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Take, O take me from thy furnace,<br/>
From this fire and cruel torture.’<br/>
“Ilmarinen thus made answer:<br/>
‘I will take thee from my furnace,<br/>
‘Thou art but a little frightened,<br/>
Thou shalt be a mighty power,<br/>
Thou shalt slay the best of heroes,<br/>
Thou shalt wound thy dearest brother.’<br/>
“Straightway Iron made this promise,<br/>
Vowed and swore in strongest accents,<br/>
By the furnace, by the anvil,<br/>
By the tongs, and by the hammer,<br/>
These the words he vowed and uttered:<br/>
‘Many trees that I shall injure,<br/>
Shall devour the hearts of mountains,<br/>
Shall not slay my nearest kindred,<br/>
Shall not kill the best of heroes,<br/>
Shall not wound my dearest brother;<br/>
Better live in civil freedom,<br/>
Happier would be my life-time,<br/>
Should I serve my fellow-beings,<br/>
Serve as tools for their convenience,<br/>
Than as implements of warfare,<br/>
Slay my friends and nearest. kindred,<br/>
Wound the children of my mother.’<br/>
“Now the master, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The renowned and skilful blacksmith,<br/>
From the fire removes the iron,<br/>
Places it upon the anvil,<br/>
Hammers well until it softens,<br/>
Hammers many fine utensils,<br/>
Hammers spears, and swords, and axes,<br/>
Hammers knives, and forks, and hatchets,<br/>
Hammers tools of all descriptions.<br/>
“Many things the blacksmith needed,<br/>
Many things he could not fashion,<br/>
Could not make the tongue of iron,<br/>
Could not hammer steel from iron,<br/>
Could not make the iron harden.<br/>
Well considered Ilmarinen,<br/>
Deeply thought and long reflected.<br/>
Then he gathered birchen ashes,<br/>
Steeped the ashes in the water,<br/>
Made a lye to harden iron,<br/>
Thus to form the steel most needful.<br/>
With his tongue he tests the mixture,<br/>
Weighs it long and well considers,<br/>
And the blacksmith speaks as follows:<br/>
‘All this labor is for nothing,<br/>
Will not fashion steel from iron,<br/>
Will not make the soft ore harden.’<br/>
“Now a bee flies from the meadow,<br/>
Blue-wing coming from the flowers,<br/>
Flies about, then safely settles<br/>
Near the furnace of the smithy.<br/>
“‘Thus the smith the bee addresses,<br/>
These the words of Ilmarinen:<br/>
‘Little bee, thou tiny birdling,<br/>
Bring me honey on thy winglets,<br/>
On thy tongue, I pray thee, bring me<br/>
Sweetness from the fragrant meadows,<br/>
From the little cups of flowers,<br/>
From the tips of seven petals,<br/>
That we thus may aid the water<br/>
To produce the steel from iron.’<br/>
“Evil Hisi’s bird, the hornet,<br/>
Heard these words of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Looking from the cottage gable,<br/>
Flying to the bark of birch-trees,<br/>
While the iron bars were heating<br/>
While the steel was being tempered;<br/>
Swiftly flew the stinging hornet,<br/>
Scattered all the Hisi horrors,<br/>
Brought the blessing of the serpent,<br/>
Brought the venom of the adder,<br/>
Brought the poison of the spider,<br/>
Brought the stings of all the insects,<br/>
Mixed them with the ore and water,<br/>
While the steel was being, tempered.<br/>
“Ilmarinen, skilful blacksmith,<br/>
First of all the iron-workers,<br/>
Thought the bee had surely brought him<br/>
Honey from the fragrant meadows,<br/>
From the little cups of flowers,<br/>
From the tips of seven petals,<br/>
And he spake the words that follow:<br/>
‘Welcome, welcome, is thy coming,<br/>
Honeyed sweetness from the flowers<br/>
Thou hast brought to aid the water,<br/>
Thus to form the steel from iron!’<br/>
“Ilmarinen, ancient blacksmith,<br/>
Dipped the iron into water,<br/>
Water mixed with many poisons,<br/>
Thought it but the wild bee’s honey;<br/>
Thus he formed the steel from iron.<br/>
When he plunged it into water,<br/>
Water mixed with many poisons,<br/>
When be placed it in the furnace,<br/>
Angry grew the hardened iron,<br/>
Broke the vow that he had taken,<br/>
Ate his words like dogs and devils,<br/>
Mercilessly cut his brother,<br/>
Madly raged against his kindred,<br/>
Caused the blood to flow in streamlets<br/>
From the wounds of man and hero.<br/>
This, the origin of iron,<br/>
And of steel of light blue color.”<br/>
From the hearth arose the gray-beard,<br/>
Shook his heavy looks and answered:<br/>
“Now I know the source of iron,<br/>
Whence the steel and whence its evils;<br/>
Curses on thee, cruel iron,<br/>
Curses on the steel thou givest,<br/>
Curses on thee, tongue of evil,<br/>
Cursed be thy life forever!<br/>
Once thou wert of little value,<br/>
Having neither form nor beauty,<br/>
Neither strength nor great importance,<br/>
When in form of milk thou rested,<br/>
When for ages thou wert hidden<br/>
In the breasts of God’s three daughters,<br/>
Hidden in their heaving bosoms,<br/>
On the borders of the cloudlets,<br/>
In the blue vault of the heavens.<br/>
“Thou wert once of little value,<br/>
Having neither form nor beauty,<br/>
Neither strength nor great importance,<br/>
When like water thou wert resting<br/>
On the broad back of the marshes,<br/>
On the steep declines of mountains,<br/>
When thou wert but formless matter,<br/>
Only dust of rusty color.<br/>
“Surely thou wert void of greatness,<br/>
Having neither strength nor beauty,<br/>
When the moose was trampling on thee,<br/>
When the roebuck trod upon thee,<br/>
When the tracks of wolves were in thee,<br/>
And the bear-paws scratched thy body.<br/>
Surely thou hadst little value<br/>
When the skilful Ilmarinen,<br/>
First of all the iron-workers,<br/>
Brought thee from the blackened swamp-lands,<br/>
Took thee to his ancient smithy,<br/>
Placed thee in his fiery furnace.<br/>
Truly thou hadst little vigor,<br/>
Little strength, and little danger,<br/>
When thou in the fire wert hissing,<br/>
Rolling forth like seething water,<br/>
From the furnace of the smithy,<br/>
When thou gavest oath the strongest,<br/>
By the furnace, by the anvil,<br/>
By the tongs, and by the hammer,<br/>
By the dwelling of the blacksmith,<br/>
By the fire within the furnace.<br/>
“Now forsooth thou hast grown mighty,<br/>
Thou canst rage in wildest fury;<br/>
Thou hast broken all thy pledges,<br/>
All thy solemn vows hast broken,<br/>
Like the dogs thou shamest honor,<br/>
Shamest both thyself and kindred,<br/>
Tainted all with breath of evil.<br/>
Tell who drove thee to this mischief,<br/>
Tell who taught thee all thy malice,<br/>
Tell who gavest thee thine evil!<br/>
Did thy father, or thy mother,<br/>
Did the eldest of thy brothers,<br/>
Did the youngest of thy sisters,<br/>
Did the worst of all thy kindred<br/>
Give to thee thine evil nature?<br/>
Not thy father, nor thy mother,<br/>
Not the eldest of thy brothers,<br/>
Not the youngest of thy sisters,<br/>
Not the worst of all thy kindred,<br/>
But thyself hast done this mischief,<br/>
Thou the cause of all our trouble.<br/>
Come and view thine evil doings,<br/>
And amend this flood of damage,<br/>
Ere I tell thy gray-haired mother,<br/>
Ere I tell thine aged father.<br/>
Great indeed a mother’s anguish,<br/>
Great indeed a father’s sorrow,<br/>
When a son does something evil,<br/>
When a child runs wild and lawless.<br/>
“Crimson streamlet, cease thy flowing<br/>
From the wounds of Wainamoinen;<br/>
Blood of ages, stop thy coursing<br/>
From the veins of the magician;<br/>
Stand like heaven’s crystal pillars,<br/>
Stand like columns in the ocean,<br/>
Stand like birch-trees in the forest,<br/>
Like the tall reeds in the marshes,<br/>
Like the high-rocks on the sea-coast,<br/>
Stand by power of mighty magic!<br/>
“Should perforce thy will impel thee,<br/>
Flow thou on thine endless circuit,<br/>
Through the veins of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Through the bones, and through the muscles,<br/>
Through the lungs, and heart, and liver,<br/>
Of the mighty sage and singer;<br/>
Better be the food of heroes,<br/>
Than to waste thy strength and virtue<br/>
On the meadows and the woodlands,<br/>
And be lost in dust and ashes.<br/>
Flow forever in thy circle;<br/>
Thou must cease this crimson out-flow;<br/>
Stain no more the grass and flowers,<br/>
Stain no more these golden hill-tops,<br/>
Pride and beauty of our heroes.<br/>
In the veins of the magician,<br/>
In the heart of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Is thy rightful home and storehouse.<br/>
Thither now withdraw thy forces,<br/>
Thither hasten, swiftly flowing;<br/>
Flow no more as crimson currents,<br/>
Fill no longer crimson lakelets,<br/>
Must not rush like brooks in spring-tide,<br/>
Nor meander like the rivers.<br/>
“Cease thy flow, by word of magic,<br/>
Cease as did the falls of Tyrya,<br/>
As the rivers of Tuoni,<br/>
When the sky withheld her rain-drops,<br/>
When the sea gave up her waters,<br/>
In the famine of the seasons,<br/>
In the years of fire and torture.<br/>
If thou heedest not this order,<br/>
I shall offer other measures,<br/>
Know I well of other forces;<br/>
I shall call the Hisi irons,<br/>
In them I shall boil and roast thee,<br/>
Thus to check thy crimson flowing,<br/>
Thus to save the wounded hero.<br/>
“If these means be inefficient,<br/>
Should these measures prove unworthy,<br/>
I shall call omniscient Ukko,<br/>
Mightiest of the creators,<br/>
Stronger than all ancient heroes,<br/>
Wiser than the world-magicians;<br/>
He will check the crimson out-flow,<br/>
He will heal this wound of hatchet.<br/>
“Ukko, God of love and mercy,<br/>
God and Master Of the heavens,<br/>
Come thou hither, thou art needed,<br/>
Come thou quickly I beseech thee,<br/>
Lend thy hand to aid thy children,<br/>
Touch this wound with healing fingers,<br/>
Stop this hero’s streaming life-blood,<br/>
Bind this wound with tender leaflets,<br/>
Mingle with them healing flowers,<br/>
Thus to check this crimson current,<br/>
Thus to save this great magician,<br/>
Save the life of Wainamoinen.”<br/>
Thus at last the blood-stream ended,<br/>
As the magic words were spoken.<br/>
Then the gray-beard, much rejoicing,<br/>
Sent his young son to the smithy,<br/>
There to make a healing balsam,<br/>
From the herbs of tender fibre,<br/>
From the healing plants and flowers,<br/>
From the stalks secreting honey,<br/>
From the roots, and leaves, and blossoms.<br/>
On the way he meets an oak-tree,<br/>
And the oak the son addresses:<br/>
“Hast thou honey in thy branches,<br/>
Does thy sap run full of sweetness?”<br/>
Thus the oak-tree wisely answers:<br/>
“Yea, but last night dripped the honey<br/>
Down upon my spreading branches,<br/>
And the clouds their fragrance sifted,<br/>
Sifted honey on my leaflets,<br/>
From their home within the heavens.”<br/>
Then the son takes oak-wood splinters,<br/>
Takes the youngest oak-tree branches,<br/>
Gathers many healing grasses,<br/>
Gathers many herbs and flowers,<br/>
Rarest herbs that grow in Northland,<br/>
Places them within the furnace<br/>
In a kettle made of copper;<br/>
Lets them steep and boil together,<br/>
Bits of bark chipped from the oak-tree,<br/>
Many herbs of healing virtues;<br/>
Steeps them one day, then a second,<br/>
Three long days of summer weather,<br/>
Days and nights in quick succession;<br/>
Then he tries his magic balsam,<br/>
Looks to see if it is ready,<br/>
If his remedy is finished;<br/>
But the balsam is unworthy.<br/>
Then he added other grasses,<br/>
Herbs of every healing virtue,<br/>
That were brought from distant nations,<br/>
Many hundred leagues from Northland,<br/>
Gathered by the wisest minstrels,<br/>
Thither brought by nine enchanters.<br/>
Three days more be steeped the balsam,<br/>
Three nights more the fire be tended,<br/>
Nine the days and nights be watched it,<br/>
Then again be tried the ointment,<br/>
Viewed it carefully and tested,<br/>
Found at last that it was ready,<br/>
Found the magic balm was finished.<br/>
Near by stood a branching birch-tree.<br/>
On the border of the meadow,<br/>
Wickedly it had been broken,<br/>
Broken down by evil Hisi;<br/>
Quick he takes his balm of healing,<br/>
And anoints the broken branches,<br/>
Rubs the balsam in the fractures,<br/>
Thus addresses then the birch-tree:<br/>
“With this balsam I anoint thee,<br/>
With this salve thy wounds I cover,<br/>
Cover well thine injured places;<br/>
Now the birch-tree shall recover,<br/>
Grow more beautiful than ever.”<br/>
True, the birch-tree soon recovered,<br/>
Grew more beautiful than ever,<br/>
Grew more uniform its branches,<br/>
And its bole more strong and stately.<br/>
Thus it was be tried the balsam,<br/>
Thus the magic salve he tested,<br/>
Touched with it the splintered sandstone,<br/>
Touched the broken blocks of granite,<br/>
Touched the fissures in the mountains,<br/>
And the broken parts united,<br/>
All the fragments grew together.<br/>
Then the young boy quick returning<br/>
With the balsam he had finished,<br/>
To the gray-beard gave the ointment,<br/>
And the boy these measures uttered<br/>
“Here I bring the balm of healing,<br/>
Wonderful the salve I bring thee;<br/>
It will join the broken granite,<br/>
Make the fragments grow together,<br/>
Heat the fissures in the mountains,<br/>
And restore the injured birch-tree.”<br/>
With his tongue the old man tested,<br/>
Tested thus the magic balsam,<br/>
Found the remedy effective,<br/>
Found the balm had magic virtues;<br/>
Then anointed he the minstrel,<br/>
Touched the wounds of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Touched them with his magic balsam,<br/>
With the balm of many virtues;<br/>
Speaking words of ancient wisdom,<br/>
These the words the gray-beard uttered:<br/>
“Do not walk in thine own virtue,<br/>
Do not work in thine own power,<br/>
Walk in strength of thy Creator;<br/>
Do not speak in thine own wisdom,<br/>
Speak with tongue of mighty Ukko.<br/>
In my mouth, if there be sweetness,<br/>
It has come from my Creator;<br/>
If my bands are filled with beauty,<br/>
All the beauty comes from Ukko.”<br/>
When the wounds had been anointed,<br/>
When the magic salve had touched them,<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Suffered fearful pain and anguish,<br/>
Sank upon the floor in torment,<br/>
Turning one way, then another,<br/>
Sought for rest and found it nowhere,<br/>
Till his pain the gray-beard banished,<br/>
Banished by the aid of magic,<br/>
Drove away his killing torment<br/>
To the court of all our trouble,<br/>
To the highest hill of torture,<br/>
To the distant rocks and ledges,<br/>
To the evil-bearing mountains,<br/>
To the realm of wicked Hisi.<br/>
Then be took some silken fabric,<br/>
Quick he tore the silk asunder,<br/>
Making equal strips for wrapping,<br/>
Tied the ends with silken ribbons,<br/>
Making thus a healing bandage;<br/>
Then he wrapped with skilful fingers<br/>
Wainamoinen’s knee and ankle,<br/>
Wrapped the wounds of the magician,<br/>
And this prayer the gray-beard uttered<br/>
“Ukko’s fabric is the bandage,<br/>
Ukko’s science is the surgeon,<br/>
These have served the wounded hero,<br/>
Wrapped the wounds of the magician.<br/>
Look upon us, God of mercy,<br/>
Come and guard us, kind Creator,<br/>
And protect us from all evil!<br/>
Guide our feet lest they may stumble,<br/>
Guard our lives from every danger,<br/>
From the wicked wilds of Hisi.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Felt the mighty aid of magic,<br/>
Felt the help of gracious Ukko,<br/>
Straightway stronger grew in body,<br/>
Straightway were the wounds united,<br/>
Quick the fearful pain departed.<br/>
Strong and hardy grew the hero,<br/>
Straightway walked in perfect freedom,<br/>
Turned his knee in all directions,<br/>
Knowing neither pain nor trouble.<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Raised his eyes to high Jumala,<br/>
Looked with gratitude to heaven,<br/>
Looked on high, in joy and gladness,<br/>
Then addressed omniscient Ukko,<br/>
This the prayer the minstrel uttered:<br/>
“O be praised, thou God of mercy,<br/>
Let me praise thee, my Creator,<br/>
Since thou gavest me assistance,<br/>
And vouchsafed me thy protection,<br/>
Healed my wounds and stilled mine anguish,<br/>
Banished all my pain and trouble,<br/>
Caused by Iron and by Hisi.<br/>
O, ye people of Wainola,<br/>
People of this generation,<br/>
And the folk of future ages,<br/>
Fashion not in emulation,<br/>
River boat, nor ocean shallop,<br/>
Boasting of its fine appearance,<br/>
God alone can work completion,<br/>
Give to cause its perfect ending,<br/>
Never hand of man can find it,<br/>
Never can the hero give it,<br/>
Ukko is the only Master.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap10"/>RUNE X.<br/>
ILMARINEN FORGES THE SAMPO.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
Takes his steed of copper color,<br/>
Hitches quick his fleet-foot courser,<br/>
Puts his racer to the snow-sledge,<br/>
Straightway springs upon the cross-seat,<br/>
Snaps his whip adorned with jewels.<br/>
Like the winds the steed flies onward,<br/>
Like a lightning flash, the racer<br/>
Makes the snow-sledge creak and rattle,<br/>
Makes the highway quickly vanish,<br/>
Dashes on through fen and forest,<br/>
Over hills and through the valleys,<br/>
Over marshes, over mountains,<br/>
Over fertile plains and meadows;<br/>
Journeys one day, then a second,<br/>
So a third from morn till evening,<br/>
Till the third day evening brings him<br/>
To the endless bridge of Osmo,<br/>
To the Osmo-fields and pastures,<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala;<br/>
When the hero spake as follows:<br/>
“May the wolves devour the dreamer,<br/>
Eat the Laplander for dinner,<br/>
May disease destroy the braggart,<br/>
Him who said that I should never<br/>
See again my much-loved home-land,<br/>
Nevermore behold my kindred,<br/>
Never during all my life-time,<br/>
Never while the sunshine brightens,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers<br/>
On the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
On the plains of Kalevala.”<br/>
Then began old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Ancient bard and famous singer,<br/>
To renew his incantations;<br/>
Sang aloft a wondrous pine-tree,<br/>
Till it pierced the clouds in growing<br/>
With its golden top and branches,<br/>
Till it touched the very heavens,<br/>
Spread its branches in the ether,<br/>
In the ever-shining sunlight.<br/>
Now he sings again enchanting,<br/>
Sings the Moon to shine forever<br/>
In the fir-tree’s emerald branches;<br/>
In its top he sings the Great Bear.<br/>
Then be quickly journeys homeward,<br/>
Hastens to his golden portals,<br/>
Head awry and visage wrinkled,<br/>
Crooked cap upon his forehead,<br/>
Since as ransom he had promised<br/>
Ilmarinen, magic artist,<br/>
Thus to save his life from torture<br/>
On the distant fields of Northland<br/>
In the dismal Sariola.<br/>
When his stallion he had halted<br/>
On the Osmo-field and meadow,<br/>
Quickly rising in his snow-sledge,<br/>
The magician heard one knocking,<br/>
Breaking coal within the smithy,<br/>
Beating with a heavy hammer.<br/>
Wainamoinen, famous minstrel,<br/>
Entering the smithy straightway,<br/>
Found the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Knocking with his copper hammer.<br/>
Ilmarinen spake as follows:<br/>
“Welcome, brother Wainamoinen,<br/>
Old and worthy Wainamoinen!<br/>
Why so long hast thou been absent,<br/>
Where hast thou so long been hiding?”<br/>
Wainamoinen then made answer,<br/>
These the words of the magician:<br/>
“Long indeed have I been living,<br/>
Many dreary days have wandered,<br/>
Many cheerless nights have lingered,<br/>
Floating on the cruel ocean,<br/>
Weeping in the fens and woodlands<br/>
Of the never-pleasant Northland,<br/>
In the dismal Sariola;<br/>
With the Laplanders I’ve wandered,<br/>
With the people filled with witchcraft.”<br/>
Promptly answers Ilmarinen,<br/>
These the words the blacksmith uses:<br/>
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Famous and eternal singer,<br/>
Tell me of thy journey northward,<br/>
Of thy wanderings in Lapland,<br/>
Of thy dismal journey homeward.”<br/>
Spake the minstrel, Wainamoinen:<br/>
“I have much to tell thee, brother,<br/>
Listen to my wondrous story:<br/>
In the Northland lives a virgin,<br/>
In a village there, a maiden,<br/>
That will not accept a lover,<br/>
That a hero’s hand refuses,<br/>
That a wizard’s heart disdaineth;<br/>
All of Northland sings her praises,<br/>
Sings her worth and magic beauty,<br/>
Fairest maiden of Pohyola,<br/>
Daughter of the earth and ocean.<br/>
From her temples beams the moonlight,<br/>
From her breast, the gleam of sunshine,<br/>
From her forehead shines the rainbow,<br/>
On her neck, the seven starlets,<br/>
And the Great Bear from her shoulder.<br/>
“Ilmarinen, worthy brother,<br/>
Thou the only skilful blacksmith,<br/>
Go and see her wondrous beauty,<br/>
See her gold and silver garments,<br/>
See her robed in finest raiment,<br/>
See her sitting on the rainbow,<br/>
Walking on the clouds of purple.<br/>
Forge for her the magic Sampo,<br/>
Forge the lid in many colors,<br/>
Thy reward shall be the virgin,<br/>
Thou shalt win this bride of beauty;<br/>
Go and bring the lovely maiden<br/>
To thy home in Kalevala.”<br/>
Spake the brother, Ilmarinen:<br/>
O thou cunning Wainamoinen,<br/>
Thou hast promised me already<br/>
To the ever-darksome Northland,<br/>
Thy devoted head to ransom,<br/>
Thus to rescue thee from trouble.<br/>
I shall never visit Northland,<br/>
Shall not go to see thy maiden,<br/>
Do not love the Bride of Beauty;<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers,<br/>
Shall I go to dreary Pohya,<br/>
To the plains of Sariola,<br/>
Where the people eat each other,<br/>
Sink their heroes in the ocean,<br/>
Not for all the maids of Lapland.”<br/>
Spake the brother, Wainamoinen:<br/>
“I can tell thee greater wonders,<br/>
Listen to my wondrous story:<br/>
I have seen the fir-tree blossom,<br/>
Seen its flowers with emerald branches,<br/>
On the Osmo-fields and woodlands;<br/>
In its top, there shines the moonlight,<br/>
And the Bear lives in its branches.”<br/>
Ilmarinen thus made answer:<br/>
“I cannot believe thy story,<br/>
Cannot trust thy tale of wonder,<br/>
Till I see the blooming fir-tree,<br/>
With its many emerald branches,<br/>
With its Bear and golden moonlight.”<br/>
This is Wainamoinen’s answer:<br/>
“Wilt thou not believe my story?<br/>
Come with me and I will show thee<br/>
If my lips speak fact or fiction.”<br/>
Quick they journey to discover,<br/>
Haste to view the wondrous fir-tree;<br/>
Wainamoinen leads the journey,<br/>
Ilmarinen closely follows.<br/>
As they near the Osmo-borders,<br/>
Ilmarinen hastens forward<br/>
That be may behold the wonder,<br/>
Spies the Bear Within the fir-top,<br/>
Sitting on its emerald branches,<br/>
Spies the gleam of golden moonlight.<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
These the words the singer uttered:<br/>
Climb this tree, dear Ilmarinen,<br/>
And bring down the golden moonbeams,<br/>
Bring the Moon and Bear down with thee<br/>
From the fir-tree’s lofty branches.”<br/>
Ilmarinen, full consenting,<br/>
Straightway climbed the golden fir-tree,<br/>
High upon the bow of heaven,<br/>
Thence to bring the golden moonbeams,<br/>
Thence to bring the Bear of heaven,<br/>
From the fir-tree’s topmost branches.<br/>
Thereupon the blooming fir-tree<br/>
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“O thou senseless, thoughtless hero,<br/>
Thou hast neither wit nor instinct;<br/>
Thou dost climb my golden branches,<br/>
Like a thing of little judgment,<br/>
Thus to get my pictured moonbeams,<br/>
Take away my silver starlight,<br/>
Steal my Bear and blooming branches.”<br/>
Quick as thought old Wainamoinen<br/>
Sang again in magic accents,<br/>
Sang a storm-wind in the heavens,<br/>
Sang the wild winds into fury,<br/>
And the singer spake as follows:<br/>
`Take, O storm-wind, take the forgeman,<br/>
Carry him within thy vessel,<br/>
Quickly hence, and land the hero<br/>
On the ever-darksome Northland,<br/>
On the dismal Sariola.”<br/>
Now the storm-wind quickly darkens,<br/>
Quickly piles the air together,<br/>
Makes of air a sailing vessel,<br/>
Takes the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Fleetly from the fir-tree branches,<br/>
Toward the never-pleasant Northland,<br/>
Toward the dismal Sariola.<br/>
Through the air sailed Ilmarinen,<br/>
Fast and far the hero travelled,<br/>
Sweeping onward, sailing northward,<br/>
Riding in the track of storm-winds,<br/>
O’er the Moon, beneath the sunshine,<br/>
On the broad back of the Great Bear,<br/>
Till he neared Pohyola’s woodlands,<br/>
Neared the homes of Sariola,<br/>
And alighted undiscovered,<br/>
Was Dot noticed by the hunters,<br/>
Was not scented by the watch-dogs.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Ancient, toothless dame of Northland,<br/>
Standing in the open court-yard,<br/>
Thus addresses Ilmarinen,<br/>
As she spies the hero-stranger:<br/>
“Who art thou of ancient heroes,<br/>
Who of all the host of heroes,<br/>
Coming here upon the storm-wind,<br/>
O’er the sledge-path of the ether,<br/>
Scented not by Pohya’s watch-dogs?<br/>
This is Ilmarinen’s answer:<br/>
“I have surely not come hither<br/>
To be barked at by the watch-dogs,<br/>
At these unfamiliar portals,<br/>
At the gates of Sariola.”<br/>
Thereupon the Northland hostess<br/>
Asks again the hero-stranger:<br/>
“Hast thou ever been acquainted<br/>
With the blacksmith of Wainola,<br/>
With the hero, Ilmarinen,<br/>
With the skilful smith and artist?<br/>
Long I’ve waited for his coming,<br/>
Long this one has been expected,<br/>
On the borders of the Northland,<br/>
Here to forge for me the Sampo.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Well indeed am I acquainted<br/>
With the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
I myself am Ilmarinen,<br/>
I, the skilful smith and artist.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Toothless dame of Sariola,<br/>
Straightway rushes to her dwelling,<br/>
These the words that Louhi utters:<br/>
“Come, thou youngest of my daughters,<br/>
Come, thou fairest of my maidens,<br/>
Dress thyself in finest raiment,<br/>
Deck thy hair with rarest jewels,<br/>
Pearls upon thy swelling bosom,<br/>
On thy neck, a golden necklace,<br/>
Bind thy head with silken ribbons,<br/>
Make thy cheeks look fresh and ruddy,<br/>
And thy visage fair and winsome,<br/>
Since the artist, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Hither comes from Kalevala,<br/>
Here to forge for us the Sampo,<br/>
Hammer us the lid in colors.”<br/>
Now the daughter of the Northland,<br/>
Honored by the land and water,<br/>
Straightway takes her choicest raiment,<br/>
Takes her dresses rich in beauty,<br/>
Finest of her silken wardrobe,<br/>
Now adjusts her silken fillet,<br/>
On her brow a band of copper,<br/>
Round her waist a golden girdle,<br/>
Round her neck a pearly necklace,<br/>
Shining gold upon her bosom,<br/>
In her hair the threads of silver.<br/>
From her dressing-room she hastens,<br/>
To the hall she bastes and listens,<br/>
Full of beauty, full of joyance,<br/>
Ears erect and eyes bright-beaming,<br/>
Ruddy cheeks and charming visage,<br/>
Waiting for the hero-stranger.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Leads the hero, Ilmarinen,<br/>
To her dwelling-rooms in Northland,<br/>
To her home in Sariola,<br/>
Seats him at her well-filled table,<br/>
Gives to him the finest viands,<br/>
Gives him every needed comfort,<br/>
Then addresses him as follows:<br/>
“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Master of the forge and smithy,<br/>
Canst thou forge for me the Sampo,<br/>
Hammer me the lid in colors,<br/>
From the tips of white-swan feathers,<br/>
From the milk of greatest virtue,<br/>
From a single grain of barley,<br/>
From the finest wool of lambkins?<br/>
Thou shalt have my fairest daughter,<br/>
Recompense for this thy service.”<br/>
These the words of Ilmarinen:<br/>
“I will forge for thee the Sampo,<br/>
Hammer thee the lid in colors,<br/>
From the tips of white-swan feathers,<br/>
From the milk of greatest virtue,<br/>
From a single grain of barley,<br/>
From the finest wool of lambkins?<br/>
Since I forged the arch of heaven,<br/>
Forged the air a concave cover,<br/>
Ere the earth had a beginning.”<br/>
Thereupon the magic blacksmith<br/>
Went to forge the wondrous Sampo,<br/>
Went to find a blacksmith’s workshop,<br/>
Went to find the tools to work with;<br/>
But he found no place for forging,<br/>
Found no smithy, found no bellows,<br/>
Found no chimney, found no anvil,<br/>
Found no tongs, and found no hammer.<br/>
Then the-artist, Ilmarinen.<br/>
Spake these words, soliloquizing:<br/>
“Only women grow discouraged,<br/>
Only knaves leave work unfinished,<br/>
Not the devils, nor the heroes,<br/>
Nor the Gods of greater knowledge.”<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Sought a place to build a smithy,<br/>
Sought a place to plant a bellows,<br/>
On the borders of the Northland,<br/>
On the Pohya-hills and meadows;<br/>
Searched one day, and then a second;<br/>
Ere the evening of the third day,<br/>
Came a rock within his vision,<br/>
Came a stone with rainbow-colors.<br/>
There the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Set at work to build his smithy,<br/>
Built a fire and raised a chimney;<br/>
On the next day laid his bellows,<br/>
On the third day built his furnace,<br/>
And began to forge the Sampo.<br/>
The eternal magic artist,<br/>
Ancient blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
First of all the iron-workers,<br/>
Mixed together certain metals,<br/>
Put the mixture in the caldron,<br/>
Laid it deep within the furnace,<br/>
Called the hirelings to the forging.<br/>
Skilfully they work the bellows,<br/>
Tend the fire and add the fuel,<br/>
Three most lovely days of summer,<br/>
Three short nights of bright midsummer,<br/>
Till the rocks begin to blossom,<br/>
In the foot-prints of the workmen,<br/>
From the magic heat and furnace.<br/>
On the first day, Ilmarinen<br/>
Downward bent and well examined,<br/>
On the bottom of his furnace,<br/>
Thus to see what might be forming<br/>
From the magic fire and metals.<br/>
From the fire arose a cross-bow,<br/>
“With the brightness of the moonbeams,<br/>
Golden bow with tips of silver;<br/>
On the shaft was shining copper,<br/>
And the bow was strong and wondrous,<br/>
But alas! it was ill-natured,<br/>
Asking for a hero daily,<br/>
Two the heads it asked on feast-days.<br/>
Ilmarinen, skilful artist,<br/>
Was not pleased with this creation,<br/>
Broke the bow in many pieces,<br/>
Threw them back within the furnace,<br/>
Kept the workmen at the bellows,<br/>
Tried to forge the magic Sampo.<br/>
On the second day, the blacksmith<br/>
Downward bent and well examined,<br/>
On the bottom of the furnace;<br/>
From the fire, a skiff of metals,<br/>
Came a boat of purple color,<br/>
All the ribs were colored golden,<br/>
And the oars were forged from copper;<br/>
Thus the skiff was full of beauty,<br/>
But alas! a thing of evil;<br/>
Forth it rushes into trouble,<br/>
Hastens into every quarrel,<br/>
Hastes without a provocation<br/>
Into every evil combat.<br/>
Ilmarinen, metal artist,<br/>
Is not pleased with this creation,<br/>
Breaks the skiff in many fragments,<br/>
Throws them back within the furnace,<br/>
Keeps the workmen at the bellows,<br/>
Thus to forge the magic Sampo.<br/>
On the third day, Ilmarinen,<br/>
First of all the metal-workers,<br/>
Downward bent and well examined,<br/>
On the bottom of the furnace;<br/>
There be saw a heifer rising,<br/>
Golden were the horns of Kimmo,<br/>
On her head the Bear of heaven,<br/>
On her brow a disc of sunshine,<br/>
Beautiful the cow of magic;<br/>
But alas! she is ill-tempered,<br/>
Rushes headlong through the forest,<br/>
Rushes through the swamps and meadows,<br/>
Wasting all her milk in running.<br/>
Ilmarinen, the magician.<br/>
Is not pleased with this creation,<br/>
Cuts the magic cow in pieces,<br/>
Throws them in the fiery furnace,<br/>
Sets the workmen at the bellows,<br/>
Thus to forge the magic Sampo.<br/>
On the fourth day, Ilmarinen<br/>
Downward bent and well examined,<br/>
To the bottom of the furnace;<br/>
There beheld a plow in beauty<br/>
Rising from the fire of metals,<br/>
Golden was the point and plowshare,<br/>
And the beam was forged from copper,<br/>
And the handles, molten silver,<br/>
Beautiful the plow and wondrous;<br/>
But alas! it is ill-mannered,<br/>
Plows up fields of corn and barley,<br/>
Furrows through the richest meadows.<br/>
Ilmarinen, metal artist,<br/>
Is not pleased with this creation,<br/>
Quickly breaks the plow in pieces,<br/>
Throws them back within the furnace,<br/>
Lets the winds attend the bellows,<br/>
Lets the storm-winds fire the metals.<br/>
Fiercely vie the winds of heaven,<br/>
East-wind rushing, West-wind roaring,<br/>
South-wind crying, North-wind howling,<br/>
Blow one day and then a second,<br/>
Blow the third from morn till even,<br/>
When the fire leaps through the windows,<br/>
Through the door the sparks fly upward,<br/>
Clouds of smoke arise to heaven;<br/>
With the clouds the black smoke mingles,<br/>
As the storm-winds ply the bellows.<br/>
On the third night Ilmarinen,<br/>
Bending low to view his metals,<br/>
On the bottom of the furnace,<br/>
Sees the magic Sampo rising,<br/>
Sees the lid in many colors.<br/>
Quick the artist of Wainola<br/>
Forges with the tongs and anvil,<br/>
Knocking with a heavy hammer,<br/>
Forges skilfully the Sampo;<br/>
On one side the flour is grinding,<br/>
On another salt is making,<br/>
On a third is money forging,<br/>
And the lid is many-colored.<br/>
Well the Sampo grinds when finished,<br/>
To and fro the lid in rocking,<br/>
Grinds one measure at the day-break,<br/>
Grinds a measure fit for eating,<br/>
Grinds a second for the market,<br/>
Grinds a third one for the store-house.<br/>
Joyfully the dame of Northland,<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Takes away the magic Sampo,<br/>
To the hills of Sariola,<br/>
To the copper-bearing mountains,<br/>
Puts nine locks upon the wonder,<br/>
Makes three strong roots creep around it;<br/>
In the earth they grow nine fathoms,<br/>
One large root beneath the mountain,<br/>
One beneath the sandy sea-bed,<br/>
One beneath the mountain-dwelling.<br/>
Modestly pleads Ilmarinen<br/>
For the maiden’s willing answer,<br/>
These the words of the magician:<br/>
“Wilt thou come with me, fair maiden,<br/>
Be my wife and queen forever?<br/>
I have forged for thee the Sampo,<br/>
Forged the lid in many colors.”<br/>
Northland’s fair and lovely daughter<br/>
Answers thus the metal-worker:<br/>
“Who will in the coming spring-time,<br/>
Who will in the second summer,<br/>
Guide the cuckoo’s song and echo?<br/>
Who will listen to his calling,<br/>
Who will sing with him in autumn,<br/>
Should I go to distant regions,<br/>
Should this cheery maiden vanish<br/>
From the fields of Sariola,<br/>
From Pohyola’s fens and forests,<br/>
Where the cuckoo sings and echoes?<br/>
Should I leave my father’s dwelling,<br/>
Should my mother’s berry vanish,<br/>
Should these mountains lose their cherry,<br/>
Then the cuckoo too would vanish,<br/>
All the birds would leave the forest,<br/>
Leave the summit of the mountain,<br/>
Leave my native fields and woodlands,<br/>
Never shall I, in my life-time,<br/>
Say farewell to maiden freedom,<br/>
Nor to summer cares and labors,<br/>
Lest the harvest be ungarnered,<br/>
Lest the berries be ungathered,<br/>
Lest the song-birds leave the forest,<br/>
Lest the mermaids leave the waters,<br/>
Lest I sing with them no longer.”<br/>
Ilmarinen, the magician,<br/>
The eternal metal-forger,<br/>
Cap awry and head dejected,<br/>
Disappointed, heavy-hearted,<br/>
Empty-handed, well considers,<br/>
How to reach his distant country,<br/>
Reach his much-loved home and kinded,<br/>
Gain the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
From the never-pleasant Northland,<br/>
From the darksome Sariola.<br/>
Louhi thus addressed the suitor:<br/>
“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Why art thou so heavy-hearted,<br/>
Why thy visage so dejected?<br/>
Hast thou in thy mind to journey<br/>
From the vales and hills of Pohya,<br/>
To the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
To thy home in Kalevala?<br/>
This is Ilmarinen’s answer:<br/>
“Thitherward my mind is tending,<br/>
To my home-land let me journey,<br/>
With my kindred let me linger,<br/>
Be at rest in mine own country.”<br/>
Straightway Louhi, dame of Northland,<br/>
Gave the hero every comfort,<br/>
Gave him food and rarest viands,<br/>
Placed him in a boat of copper,<br/>
In a copper-banded vessel,<br/>
Called the winds to his assistance,<br/>
Made the North-wind guide him homeward.<br/>
Thus the skilful Ilmarinen<br/>
Travels toward his native country,<br/>
On the blue back of the waters,<br/>
Travels one day, then a second,<br/>
Till the third day evening brings him<br/>
To Wainola’s peaceful meadows,<br/>
To his home in Kalevala.<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Thus addresses Ilmarinen:<br/>
“O my brother, metal-artist,<br/>
Thou eternal wonder-worker,<br/>
Didst thou forge the magic Sampo,<br/>
Forge the lid in many colors?”<br/>
Spake the brother, Ilmarinen,<br/>
These the words the master uttered:<br/>
“Yea, I forged the magic Sampo,<br/>
Forged the lid in many colors;<br/>
To and fro the lid in rocking<br/>
Grinds one measure at the day-dawn,<br/>
Grinds a measure fit for eating,<br/>
Grinds a second for the market,<br/>
Grinds a third one for the store-house.<br/>
Louhi has the wondrous Sampo,<br/>
I have not the Bride of Beauty.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap11"/>RUNE XI.<br/>
LEMMINKAINEN’S LAMENT.</h2>
<p>This the time to sing of Ahti,<br/>
Son of Lempo, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Also known as Lemminkainen.<br/>
Ahti was the king of islands,<br/>
Grew amid the island-dwellings,<br/>
At the site of his dear mother,<br/>
On the borders of the ocean,<br/>
On the points of promontories.<br/>
Ahti fed upon the salmon,<br/>
Fed upon the ocean whiting,<br/>
Thus became a mighty hero,<br/>
In his veins the blood of ages,<br/>
Read erect and form commanding,<br/>
Growth of mind and body perfect<br/>
But alas! he had his failings,<br/>
Bad indeed his heart and morals,<br/>
Roaming in unworthy places,<br/>
Staying days and nights in sequences<br/>
At the homes of merry maidens,<br/>
At the dances of the virgins,<br/>
With the maids of braided tresses.<br/>
Up in Sahri lived a maiden,<br/>
Lived the fair and winsome Kulli,<br/>
Lovely as a summer-flower,<br/>
From a kingly house descended,<br/>
Grew to perfect form and beauty,<br/>
Living in her father’s cottage,<br/>
Home of many ancient heroes,<br/>
Beautiful was she and queenly,<br/>
Praised throughout the whole of Ehstland;<br/>
From afar men came to woo her,<br/>
To the birthplace of the virgin,<br/>
To the household of her mother.<br/>
For his son the Day-star wooes her,<br/>
But she will not go to Sun-land,<br/>
Will not shine beside the Day-star,<br/>
In his haste to bring the summer.<br/>
For her son, the bright Moon wooes her,<br/>
But she will not go to Moon-land,<br/>
By the bright Moon will not glimmer,<br/>
Will not run through boundless ether.<br/>
For his son the Night-star wooes her,<br/>
But she will not go to Star-land,<br/>
Will not twinkle in the starlight,<br/>
Through the dreary nights in winter.<br/>
Lovers come from distant Ehstlaud,<br/>
Others come from far-off Ingern,<br/>
But they cannot win the maiden,<br/>
This the answer that she gives them<br/>
“Vainly are your praises lavished<br/>
Vainly is your silver offered,<br/>
Wealth and praise are no temptation;<br/>
Never shall I go to Ehstland,<br/>
Never shall I go a-rowing<br/>
On the waters of the Ingern,<br/>
Shall not cross the Sahri-waters,<br/>
Never eat the fish of Ehstland,<br/>
Never taste the Ehstland viands.<br/>
Ingerland shall never see me,<br/>
Will not row upon her rivers,<br/>
Will not step within her borders;<br/>
Hunger there, and fell starvation,<br/>
Wood is absent, fuel wanting,<br/>
Neither water, wheat, nor barley,<br/>
Even rye is not abundant.”<br/>
Lemminkainen of the islands,<br/>
Warlike hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Undertakes to win the maiden,<br/>
Woo and win the Sahri-flower,<br/>
Win a bride so highly honored,<br/>
Win the maid with golden tresses,<br/>
Win the Sahri maid of beauty;<br/>
But his mother gives him warning:<br/>
“Nay,” replies his gray-haired mother,<br/>
“Do not woo, my son beloved,<br/>
Maiden of a higher station;<br/>
She will never make thee happy<br/>
With her lineage of Sahri.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
These the words of Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Should I come from lowly station,<br/>
Though my tribe is not the highest,<br/>
I shall woo to please my fancy,<br/>
Woo the maiden fair and lovely,<br/>
Choose a wife for worth and beauty.”<br/>
This the anxious mother’s answer:<br/>
“Lemminkainen, son beloved,<br/>
Listen to advice maternal:<br/>
Do not go to distant Sahri,<br/>
To her tribe of many branches;<br/>
All the maidens there will taunt thee,<br/>
All the women will deride thee.”<br/>
Lemminkainen, little hearing,<br/>
Answers thus his mother’s pleading:<br/>
“I will still the sneers of women,<br/>
Silence all the taunts of maidens,<br/>
I will crush their haughty bosoms,<br/>
Smite the hands and cheeks of infants;<br/>
Surely this will check their insults,<br/>
Fitting ending to derision!”<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“Woe is me, my son beloved!<br/>
Woe is me, my life hard-fated!<br/>
Shouldst thou taunt the Sahri daughters.<br/>
Or insult the maids of virtue,<br/>
Shouldst thou laugh them to derision,<br/>
There will rise a great contention,<br/>
Fierce the battle that will follow.<br/>
All the hosts of Sahri-suitors,<br/>
Armed in thousands will attack thee,<br/>
And will slay thee for thy folly.”<br/>
Nothing listing, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Heeding not his mother’s warning,<br/>
Led his war-horse from the stables,<br/>
Quickly hitched the fiery charger,<br/>
Fleetly drove upon his journey,<br/>
To the distant Sahri-village,<br/>
There to woo the Sahri-flower,<br/>
There to win the Bride of Beauty.<br/>
All the aged Sahri-women,<br/>
All the young and lovely maidens<br/>
Laughed to scorn the coming stranger<br/>
Driving careless through the alleys,<br/>
Wildly driving through the court-yard,<br/>
Now upsetting in the gate-way,<br/>
Breaking shaft, and hame, and runner.<br/>
Then the fearless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Mouth awry and visage wrinkled,<br/>
Shook his sable locks and answered:<br/>
“Never in my recollection<br/>
Have I heard or seen such treatment,<br/>
Never have I been derided,<br/>
Never suffered sneers of women,<br/>
Never suffered scorn of virgins,<br/>
Not in my immortal life-time.<br/>
Is there any place befitting<br/>
On the Sahri-plains and pastures,<br/>
Where to join in songs and dances?<br/>
Is there here a hall for pleasure,<br/>
Where the Sahri-maidens linger,<br/>
Merry maids with braided tresses?”<br/>
Thereupon the Sahri-maidens<br/>
Answered from their promontory.,<br/>
“Room enough is there in Sahri,<br/>
Room upon the Sahri-pastures,<br/>
Room for pleasure-halls and dances;<br/>
Sing and dance upon our meadows,<br/>
Be a shepherd on the mountains,<br/>
Shepherd-boys have room for dancing;<br/>
Indolent the Sahri-children,<br/>
But the colts are fat and frisky.”<br/>
Little caring, Lemminkainen<br/>
Entered service there as shepherd,<br/>
In the daytime on the pastures,<br/>
In the evening, making merry<br/>
At the games of lively maidens,<br/>
At the dances with the virgins,<br/>
With the maids with braided tresses.<br/>
Thus it was that Lemminkainen,<br/>
Thus the shepherd, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Quickly hushed the women’s laughter,<br/>
Quickly quenched the taunts of maidens,<br/>
Quickly silenced their derision.<br/>
All the dames and Sahri-daughters<br/>
Soon were feasting Lemminkainen,<br/>
At his side they danced and lingered.<br/>
Only was there one among them,<br/>
One among the Sahri-virgins,<br/>
Harbored neither love nor wooers,<br/>
Favored neither gods nor heroes,<br/>
This the lovely maid Kyllikki,<br/>
This the Sahri’s fairest flower.<br/>
Lemminkainen, full of pleasure,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Rowed a hundred boats in pieces,<br/>
Pulled a thousand oars to fragments,<br/>
While he wooed the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Tried to win the fair Kyllikki.<br/>
Finally the lovely maiden,<br/>
Fairest daughter of the Northland,<br/>
Thus addresses Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Why dost linger here, thou weak one,<br/>
Why dost murmur on these borders,<br/>
Why come wooing at my fireside,<br/>
Wooing me in belt of copper?<br/>
Have no time to waste upon thee,<br/>
Rather give this stone its polish,<br/>
Rather would I turn the pestle<br/>
In the heavy sandstone mortar;<br/>
Rather sit beside my mother<br/>
In the dwellings of my father.<br/>
Never shall I heed thy wooing,<br/>
Neither wights nor whisks I care for,<br/>
Sooner have a slender husband<br/>
Since I have a slender body;<br/>
Wish to have him fine of figure,<br/>
Since perchance I am well-shapen;<br/>
Wish to have him tall and stately,<br/>
Since my form perchance is queenly;<br/>
Never waste thy time in wooing<br/>
Saliri’s maid and favored flower.”<br/>
Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
Scarcely had a month passed over,<br/>
When upon a merry evening,<br/>
Where the maidens meet for dancing,<br/>
In the glen beyond the meadow,<br/>
On a level patch of verdure,<br/>
Came too soon the maid Kyllikki,<br/>
Sahri’s pride, the Maid of Beauty;<br/>
Quickly followed Lemminkainen,<br/>
With his stallion proudly prancing,<br/>
Fleetest racer of the Northland,<br/>
Fleetly drives beyond the meadow,<br/>
Where the maidens meet for dancing,<br/>
Snatches quick the maid Kyllikki,<br/>
On the settle seats the maiden,<br/>
Quickly draws the leathern cover,<br/>
And adjusts the brichen cross-bar,<br/>
Whips his courser to a gallop.<br/>
With a rush, and roar, and rattle,<br/>
Speeds he homeward like the storm-wind,<br/>
Speaks these words to those that listen:<br/>
“Never, never, anxious maidens,<br/>
Must ye give the information,<br/>
That I carried off Kyllikki<br/>
To my distant home and kindred.<br/>
If ye do not heed this order,<br/>
Ye shall badly fare as maidens;<br/>
I shall sing to war your suitors,<br/>
Sing them under spear and broadsword,<br/>
That for months, and years, and ages,<br/>
Never ye will see their faces,<br/>
Never hear their merry voices,<br/>
Never will they tread these uplands,<br/>
Never will they join these dances,<br/>
Never will they drive these highways.”<br/>
Sad the wailing of Kyllikki,<br/>
Sad the weeping flower of Sahri!<br/>
Listen to her tearful pleading:<br/>
“Give, O give me back my freedom,<br/>
Free me from the throes of thralldom,<br/>
Let this maiden wander homeward,<br/>
By some foot-path let me wander<br/>
To my father who is grieving,<br/>
To my mother who is weeping;<br/>
Let me go or I will curse thee!<br/>
If thou wilt not give me freedom,<br/>
Wilt not let me wander homeward,<br/>
Where my loved ones wait my coming,<br/>
I have seven stalwart brothers,<br/>
Seven sons of father’s brother,<br/>
Seven sons of mother’s sister,<br/>
Who pursue the tracks of red-deer,<br/>
Hunt the hare upon the heather;<br/>
They will follow thee and slay thee,<br/>
Thus I’ll gain my wished-for freedom.”<br/>
Lemminkainen, little heeding,<br/>
Would not grant the maiden’s wishes,<br/>
Would not heed her plea for mercy.<br/>
Spake again the waiting virgin,<br/>
Pride and beauty of the Northland:<br/>
“Joyful was I with my kindred,<br/>
Joyful born and softly nurtured<br/>
Merrily I spent my childhood,<br/>
Happy I, in virgin-freedom,<br/>
In the dwelling of my father,<br/>
By the bedside of my mother,<br/>
With my lineage in Sahri;<br/>
But alas! all joy has vanished,<br/>
All my happiness departed,<br/>
All my maiden beauty waneth<br/>
Since I met thine evil spirit,<br/>
Shameless hero of dishonor,<br/>
Cruel fighter of the islands,<br/>
Merciless in civil combat.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
These the words of Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Dearest maiden, fair Kyllikki,<br/>
My sweet strawberry of Pohya,<br/>
Still thine anguish, cease thy weeping,<br/>
Be thou free from care and sorrow,<br/>
Never shall I do thee evil,<br/>
Never will my hands maltreat thee,<br/>
Never will mine arms abuse thee,<br/>
Never will my tongue revile thee,<br/>
Never will my heart deceive thee.<br/>
“Tell me why thou hast this anguish,<br/>
Why thou hast this bitter sorrow,<br/>
Why this sighing and lamenting,<br/>
Tell me why this wail of sadness?<br/>
Banish all thy cares and sorrows,<br/>
Dry thy tears and still thine anguish,<br/>
I have cattle, food, and shelter,<br/>
I have home, and friends, and kindred,<br/>
Kine upon the plains and uplands,<br/>
In the marshes berries plenty,<br/>
Strawberries upon the mountains<br/>
I have kine that need no milking,<br/>
Handsome kine that need no feeding,<br/>
Beautiful if not well-tended;<br/>
Need not tie them up at evening,<br/>
Need not free them in the morning,<br/>
Need not hunt them, need not feed them,<br/>
Need not give them salt nor water.<br/>
“Thinkest thou my race is lowly,<br/>
Dost thou think me born ignoble,<br/>
Does my lineage agrieve thee?<br/>
Was not born in lofty station,<br/>
From a tribe of noble heroes,<br/>
From a worthy race descended;<br/>
But I have a sword of fervor,<br/>
And a spear yet filled with courage,<br/>
Surely these are well descended,<br/>
These were born from hero-races,<br/>
Sharpened by the mighty Hisi,<br/>
By the gods were forged and burnished;<br/>
Therefore will I give thee greatness,<br/>
Greatness of my race and nation,<br/>
With my broadsword filled with fervor,<br/>
With my spear still filled with courage.”<br/>
Anxiously the sighing maiden<br/>
Thus addresses Lemminkainen:<br/>
“O thou Ahti, son of Lempo,<br/>
Wilt thou take this trusting virgin,<br/>
As thy faithful life-companion,<br/>
Take me under thy protection,<br/>
Be to me a faithful husband,<br/>
Swear to me an oath of honor,<br/>
That thou wilt not go to battle,<br/>
When for gold thou hast a longing,<br/>
When thou wishest gold and silver?”<br/>
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:<br/>
I will swear an oath of honor,<br/>
That I’ll never go to battle,<br/>
When for gold I feel a longing,<br/>
When I wish for gold and silver.<br/>
Swear thou also on thine honor,<br/>
Thou wilt go not to the village,<br/>
When desire for dance impels thee,<br/>
Wilt not visit village-dances.”<br/>
Thus the two made oath together,<br/>
Registered their vows in heaven,<br/>
Vowed before omniscient Ukko,<br/>
Ne’er to go to war vowed Ahti,<br/>
Never to the dance, Kyllikki.<br/>
Lemminkainen, full of joyance,<br/>
Snapped his whip above his courser,<br/>
Whipped his racer to a gallop,<br/>
And these words the hero uttered:<br/>
“Fare ye well, ye Sahri-meadows,<br/>
Roots of firs, and stumps of birch-trees.<br/>
That I wandered through in summer,<br/>
That I travelled o’er in winter,<br/>
Where ofttimes in rainy seasons,<br/>
At the evening hour I lingered,<br/>
When I sought to win the virgin,<br/>
Sought to win the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Fairest of the Sahri-flowers.<br/>
Fare ye well, ye Sahri-woodlands,<br/>
Seas and oceans, lakes and rivers,<br/>
Vales and mountains, isles and inlets,<br/>
Once the home of fair Kyllikki!”<br/>
Quick the racer galloped homeward,<br/>
Galloped on along the highway,<br/>
Toward the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala.<br/>
As they neared the Ahti-dwellings,<br/>
Thus Kyllikki spake in sorrow:<br/>
“Cold and drear is thy cottage,<br/>
Seeming like a place deserted;<br/>
Who may own this dismal cabin,<br/>
Who the one so little honored?”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
These the words that Ahti uttered:<br/>
“Do not grieve about my cottage,<br/>
Have no care about my chambers;<br/>
I shall build thee other dwellings,<br/>
I shall fashion them much better,<br/>
Beams, and posts, and sills, and rafters,<br/>
Fashioned from the sacred birch-wood.”<br/>
Now they reach the home of Ahti,<br/>
Lemminkainen’s home and birthplace,<br/>
Enter they his mother’s cottage;<br/>
There they meet his aged mother,<br/>
These the words the mother uses:<br/>
“Long indeed hast thou been absent,<br/>
Long in foreign lands hast wandered,<br/>
Long in Sahri thou hast lingered!”<br/>
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:<br/>
“All the host of Sahri-women,<br/>
All the chaste and lovely maidens,<br/>
All the maids with braided tresses,<br/>
Well have paid for their derision,<br/>
For their scorn and for their laughter,<br/>
That they basely heaped upon me.<br/>
I have brought the best among them<br/>
In my sledge to this thy cottage;<br/>
Well I wrapped her in my fur-robes,<br/>
Kept her warm enwrapped in bear-skin,<br/>
Brought her to my mother’s dwelling,<br/>
As my faithful life-companion;<br/>
Thus I paid the scornful maidens,<br/>
Paid them well for their derision.<br/>
“Cherished mother of my being,<br/>
I have found the long-sought jewel,<br/>
I have won the Maid of Beauty.<br/>
Spread our couch with finest linen,<br/>
For our heads the softest pillows,<br/>
On our table rarest viands,<br/>
So that I may dwell in pleasure<br/>
With my spouse, the bride of honor,<br/>
With the pride of distant Sahri.”<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“Be thou praised, O gracious Ukko,<br/>
Loudly praised, O thou Creator,<br/>
Since thou givest me a daughter,<br/>
Ahti’s bride, my second daughter,<br/>
Who can stir the fire at evening,<br/>
Who can weave me finest fabrics,<br/>
Who can twirl the useful spindle,<br/>
Who can rinse my silken ribbons,<br/>
Who can full the richest garments.<br/>
“Son beloved, praise thy Maker,<br/>
For the winning of this virgin,<br/>
Pride and joy of distant Sahri<br/>
Kind indeed is thy Creator,<br/>
Wise the ever-knowing Ukko!<br/>
Pure the snow upon the mountains,<br/>
Purer still thy Bride of Beauty;<br/>
White the foam upon the ocean,<br/>
Whiter still her virgin-spirit;<br/>
Graceful on the lakes, the white-swan,<br/>
Still more graceful, thy companion:<br/>
Beautiful the stars in heaven,<br/>
Still more beautiful, Kyllikki.<br/>
Larger make our humble cottage,<br/>
Wider build the doors and windows,<br/>
Fashion thou the ceilings higher,<br/>
Decorate the walls in beauty,<br/>
Now that thou a bride hast taken<br/>
From a tribe of higher station,<br/>
Purest maiden of creation,<br/>
From the meadow-lands of Sahri,<br/>
From the upper shores of Northland.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap12"/>RUNE XII.<br/>
KYLLIKKI’S BROKEN VOW.</h2>
<p>Lemminkainen, artful husband,<br/>
Reckless hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Constantly beside his young wife.,<br/>
Passed his life in sweet contentment,<br/>
And the years rolled swiftly onward;<br/>
Ahti thought not of the battles,<br/>
Nor Kyllikki of the dances.<br/>
Once upon a time it happened<br/>
That the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Went upon the lake a-fishing,<br/>
Was not home at early evening,<br/>
As the cruel night descended;<br/>
To the village went Kyllikki,<br/>
To the dance of merry maidens.<br/>
Who will tell the evil story,<br/>
Who will bear the information<br/>
To the husband, Lemminkainen?<br/>
Ahti’s sister tells the story,<br/>
And the sister’s name, Ainikki.<br/>
Soon she spreads the cruel tidings,<br/>
Straightway gives the information,<br/>
Of Kyllikki’s perjured honor,<br/>
These the words Ainikki utters:<br/>
“Ahti, my beloved brother,<br/>
To the village went Kyllikki,<br/>
To the hall of many strangers,<br/>
To the plays and village dances,<br/>
With the young men and the maidens,<br/>
With the maids of braided tresses,<br/>
To the halls of joy and pleasure.”<br/>
Lemminkainen, much dejected,<br/>
Broken-hearted, flushed with anger,<br/>
Spake these words in measured accents:<br/>
“Mother dear, my gray-haired mother,<br/>
Wilt thou straightway wash my linen<br/>
In the blood of poison-serpents,<br/>
In the black blood of the adder?<br/>
I must hasten to the combat,<br/>
To the camp-fires of the Northland,<br/>
To the battle-fields of Lapland;<br/>
To the village went Kyllikki,<br/>
To the play of merry maidens,<br/>
To the games and village dances,<br/>
With the maids of braided tresses.”<br/>
Straightway speaks the wife, Kyllikki:<br/>
“My beloved husband, Ahti,<br/>
Do not go to war, I pray thee.<br/>
In the evening I lay sleeping,<br/>
Slumbering I saw in dream-land<br/>
Fire upshooting from the chimney,<br/>
Flames arising, mounting skyward,<br/>
From the windows of this dwelling,<br/>
From the summits of these rafters,<br/>
Piercing through our upper chambers,<br/>
Roaring like the fall of waters,<br/>
Leaping from the floor and ceiling,<br/>
Darting from the halls and doorways.”<br/>
But the doubting Lemminkainen<br/>
Makes this answer to Kyllikki:<br/>
“I discredit dreams or women,<br/>
Have no faith in vows of maidens!<br/>
Faithful mother of my being,<br/>
Hither bring my mail of copper;<br/>
Strong desire is stirring in me<br/>
For the cup of deadly combat,<br/>
For the mead of martial conquest.”<br/>
This the pleading mother’s answer:<br/>
“Lemminkainen, son beloved,<br/>
Do not go to war I pray thee;<br/>
We have foaming beer abundant,<br/>
In our vessels beer of barley,<br/>
Held in casks by oaken spigots;<br/>
Drink this beer of peace and pleasure,<br/>
Let us drink of it together.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“I shall taste no more the viands,<br/>
In the home of false Kyllikki;<br/>
Rather would I drink the water<br/>
From the painted tips of birch-oars;<br/>
Sweeter far to me the water,<br/>
Than the beverage of dishonor,<br/>
At my mother’s home and fireside!<br/>
“Hither bring my martial doublet,<br/>
Bring me now the sword of battle,<br/>
Bring my father’s sword of honor;<br/>
I must go to upper Northland,<br/>
To the battle-fields of Lapland,<br/>
There to win me gold and silver.”<br/>
This the anxious mother’s answer:<br/>
“My beloved Kaukomieli,<br/>
We have gold in great abundance,<br/>
Gold and silver in the store-room;<br/>
Recently upon the uplands,<br/>
In the early hours of morning,<br/>
Toiled the workmen in the corn-fields,<br/>
Plowed the meadows filled with serpents,<br/>
When the plowshare raised the cover<br/>
From a chest of gold and silver,<br/>
Countless was the gold uncovered,<br/>
Hid beneath the grassy meadow;<br/>
This the treasure I have brought thee,<br/>
Take the countless gold in welcome.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Do not wish thy household silver,<br/>
From the wars I’ll earn my silver;<br/>
Gold and silver from the combat<br/>
Are to me of greater value<br/>
Than the wealth thou hast discovered.<br/>
Bring me now my heavy armor,<br/>
Bring me too my spear and broadsword;<br/>
To the Northland I must hasten,<br/>
To the bloody wars of Lapland,<br/>
Thither does my pride impel me,<br/>
Thitherward my heart is turning.<br/>
“I have heard a tale of Lapland,<br/>
Some believe the wondrous story,<br/>
That a maid in Pimentola<br/>
Lives that does not care for suitors,<br/>
Does not care for bearded heroes.”<br/>
This the aged mother’s answer:<br/>
“Warlike Athi, son beloved,<br/>
In thy home thou hast Kyllikki,<br/>
Fairest wife of all the islands;<br/>
Strange to see two wives abiding<br/>
In the home of but one husband.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“To the village runs Kyllikki;<br/>
Let her run to village dances,<br/>
Let her sleep in other dwellings,<br/>
With the village youth find pleasure,<br/>
With the maids of braided tresses.”<br/>
Seeks the mother to detain him,<br/>
Thus the anxious mother answers:<br/>
“Do not go, my son beloved,<br/>
Ignorant of Pohya-witchcraft,<br/>
To the distant homes of Northland<br/>
Till thou hast the art of magic,<br/>
Till thou hast some little wisdom<br/>
Do not go to fields of battle,<br/>
To the fires of Northland’s children,<br/>
To the slaughter-fields of Lapland,<br/>
Till of magic thou art master.<br/>
There the Lapland maids will charm thee,<br/>
Turyalanders will bewitch thee,<br/>
Sing thy visage into charcoal,<br/>
Head and shoulders to the furnace,<br/>
Into ashes sing thy fore-arm,<br/>
Into fire direct thy footsteps.”<br/>
Spake the warlike Lemminkainen:<br/>
Wizards often have bewitched me,<br/>
And the fascinating serpents;<br/>
Lapland wizards, three in number,<br/>
On an eve in time of summer,<br/>
Sitting on a rock at twilight,<br/>
Not a garment to protect them,<br/>
Once bewitched me with their magic;<br/>
This much they have taken from me,<br/>
This the sum of all my losses:<br/>
What the hatchet gains from flint-stone,<br/>
What the auger bores from granite,<br/>
What the heel chips from the iceberg,<br/>
And what death purloins from tomb-stones.<br/>
“Horribly the wizards threatened,<br/>
Tried to sink me with their magic,<br/>
In the water of the marshes,<br/>
In the mud and treacherous quicksand,<br/>
To my chin in mire and water;<br/>
But I too was born a hero,<br/>
Born a hero and magician,<br/>
Was not troubled by their magic.<br/>
“Straightway I began my singing,<br/>
Sang the archers with their arrows,<br/>
Sang the spearmen with their weapons,<br/>
Sang the swordsmen with their poniards,<br/>
Sang the singers with their singing,<br/>
The enchanters with their magic,<br/>
To the rapids of the rivers,<br/>
To the highest fall of waters,<br/>
To the all-devouring whirlpool,<br/>
To the deepest depths of ocean,<br/>
Where the wizards still are sleeping,<br/>
Sleeping till the grass shoots upward<br/>
Through the beards and wrinkled faces,<br/>
Through the locks of the enchanters,<br/>
As they sleep beneath the billows.”<br/>
Still entreats the anxious mother,<br/>
Still beseeches Lemminkainen,<br/>
Trying to restrain the hero,<br/>
While Kyllikki begs forgiveness;<br/>
This the language of the mother:<br/>
“Do not go, my son beloved,<br/>
To the villages of Northland,<br/>
Nor to Lapland’s frigid borders;<br/>
Dire misfortune will befall thee,<br/>
Star of evil settle o’er thee,<br/>
Lemminkainen’s end, destruction.<br/>
“Couldst thou speak in tongues a hundred,<br/>
I could not believe thee able,<br/>
Through the magic of thy singing,<br/>
To enchant the sons of Lapland<br/>
To the bottom of the ocean,<br/>
Dost not know the Tury-language,<br/>
Canst but speak the tongue of Suomi,<br/>
Canst not win by witless magic.”<br/>
Lemminkainen, reckless hero,<br/>
Also known as Kaukomieli,<br/>
Stood beside his mother, combing<br/>
Out his sable locks and musing,<br/>
Brushing down his beard, debating,<br/>
Steadfast still in his decision,<br/>
Quickly hurls his brush in anger,<br/>
Hurls it to the wall opposing,<br/>
Gives his mother final answer,<br/>
These the words that Ahti uses:<br/>
“Dire misfortune will befall me,<br/>
Some sad fate will overtake me,<br/>
Evil come to Lemminkainen,<br/>
When the blood flows from that hair-brush,<br/>
When blood oozes from those bristles.”<br/>
Thus the warlike Lemminkainen<br/>
Goes to never-pleasant Lapland,<br/>
Heeding not his mother’s warning,<br/>
Heeding not her prohibition.<br/>
Thus the hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Quick equips himself for warfare,<br/>
On his head a copper helmet,<br/>
On his shoulders caps of copper,<br/>
On his body iron armor,<br/>
Steel, the belt around his body;<br/>
As he girds himself for battle,<br/>
Ahti thus soliloquizing:<br/>
“Strong the hero in his armor,<br/>
Strong indeed in copper helmet,<br/>
Powerful in mail of iron,<br/>
Stronger far than any hero<br/>
On the dismal shores of Lapland,<br/>
Need not fear their wise enchanters,<br/>
Need not fear their strongest foemen,<br/>
Need not fear a war with wizards.”<br/>
Grasped he then the sword of battle,<br/>
Firmly grasped the heavy broadsword<br/>
That Tuoni had been grinding,<br/>
That the gods had brightly burnished,<br/>
Thrust it in the leathern scabbard,<br/>
Tied the scabbard to his armor.<br/>
How do heroes guard from danger,<br/>
Where protect themselves from evil?<br/>
Heroes guard their homes and firesides,<br/>
Guard their doors, and roofs, and windows,<br/>
Guard the posts that bold the torch-lights,<br/>
Guard the highways to the court-yard,<br/>
Guard the ends of all the gate-ways.<br/>
Heroes guard themselves from women,<br/>
Carefully from merry maidens;<br/>
If in this their strength be wanting,<br/>
Easy fall the heroes, victims<br/>
To the snares of the enchanters.<br/>
Furthermore are heroes watchful<br/>
Of the tribes of warlike giants,<br/>
Where the highway doubly branches,<br/>
On the borders of the blue-rock,<br/>
On the marshes filled with evil,<br/>
Near the mighty fall of waters,<br/>
Near the circling of the whirlpool,<br/>
Near the fiery springs and rapids.<br/>
Spake the stout-heart, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Rise ye heroes of the broadsword,<br/>
Ye, the earth’s eternal heroes,<br/>
From the deeps, ye sickle-bearers,<br/>
From the brooks, ye crossbow-shooters,<br/>
Come, thou forest, with thine archers,<br/>
Come, ye thickets, with your armies,<br/>
Mountain spirits, with your powers,<br/>
Come, fell Hisi, with thy horrors,<br/>
Water-mother, with thy dangers,<br/>
Come, Wellamo, with thy mermaids,<br/>
Come, ye maidens from the valleys,<br/>
Come, ye nymphs from winding rivers,<br/>
Be protection to this hero,<br/>
Be his day-and-night companions,<br/>
Body-guard to Lemminkainen,<br/>
Thus to blunt the spears of wizards,<br/>
Thus to dull their pointed arrows,<br/>
That the spears of the enchanters,<br/>
That the arrows of the archers,<br/>
That the weapons of the foemen,<br/>
May not harm this bearded hero.<br/>
“Should this force be insufficient,<br/>
I can call on other powers,<br/>
I can call the gods above me,<br/>
Call the great god of the heavens,<br/>
Him who gives the clouds their courses,<br/>
Him who rules through boundless ether,<br/>
Who directs the march of storm-winds.<br/>
“Ukko, thou O God above me,<br/>
Thou the father of creation,<br/>
Thou that speakest through the thunder,<br/>
Thou whose weapon is the lightning,<br/>
Thou whose voice is borne by ether,<br/>
Grant me now thy mighty fire-sword,<br/>
Give me here thy burning arrows,<br/>
Lightning arrows for my quiver,<br/>
Thus protect me from all danger,<br/>
Guard me from the wiles of witches,<br/>
Guide my feet from every evil,<br/>
Help me conquer the enchanters,<br/>
Help me drive them from the Northland;<br/>
Those that stand in front of battle,<br/>
Those that fill the ranks behind me,<br/>
Those around me, those above me,<br/>
Those beneath me, help me banish,.<br/>
With their knives, and swords, and cross-bows,<br/>
With their spears of keenest temper,<br/>
With their tongues of evil magic;<br/>
Help me drive these Lapland wizards<br/>
To the deepest depths of ocean,<br/>
There to wrestle with Wellamo.”<br/>
Then the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Whistled loudly for his stallion,<br/>
Called the racer from the hurdles,<br/>
Called his brown steed from the pasture,<br/>
Threw the harness on the courser,<br/>
Hitched the fleet-foot to the snow-sledge,<br/>
Leaped upon the highest cross-bench,<br/>
Cracked his whip above the racer,<br/>
And the steed flies onward swiftly,<br/>
Bounds the sleigh upon its journey,<br/>
And the golden plain re-echoes;<br/>
Travels one day, then a second,<br/>
Travels all the next day northward,<br/>
Till the third day evening brings him<br/>
To a sorry Northland village,<br/>
On the dismal shores of Lapland.<br/>
Here the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Drove along the lowest highway,<br/>
Through the streets along the border,<br/>
To a court-yard in the hamlet,<br/>
Asked one standing in the doorway:<br/>
“Is there one within this dwelling,<br/>
That can loose my stallion’s breastplate,<br/>
That can lift his heavy collar,<br/>
That these shafts can rightly lower?”<br/>
On the floor a babe was playing,<br/>
And the young child gave this answer:<br/>
“There is no one in this dwelling<br/>
That can loose thy stallion’s breastplate,<br/>
That can lift his heavy collar,<br/>
That the shafts can rightly lower.”<br/>
Lemminkainen, not discouraged,<br/>
Whips his racer to a gallop,<br/>
Rushes forward through the village,<br/>
On the middle of the highways,<br/>
To the court-yard in the centre,<br/>
Asks one standing in the threshold,<br/>
Leaning on the penthouse door-posts:<br/>
“Is there any one here dwelling<br/>
That can slip my stallion’s bridle,<br/>
That can loose his leathern breast-straps,<br/>
That can tend my royal racer?”<br/>
From the fire-place spake a wizard,<br/>
From her bench the witch made answer:<br/>
“Thou canst find one in this dwelling,<br/>
That can slip thy courser’s bridle,<br/>
That can loose his heavy breastplate,<br/>
That can tend thy royal racer.<br/>
There are here a thousand heroes<br/>
That can make thee hasten homeward,<br/>
That can give thee fleet-foot stallions,<br/>
That can chase thee to thy country,<br/>
Reckless rascal and magician,<br/>
To thy home and fellow minstrels,<br/>
To the uplands of thy father,<br/>
To the cabins of thy mother,<br/>
To the work-bench of thy brother,<br/>
To the dairy or thy sister,<br/>
Ere the evening star has risen,<br/>
Ere the sun retires to slumber.”<br/>
Lemminkainen, little fearing,<br/>
Gives this answer to the wizard:<br/>
“I should slay thee for thy pertness,<br/>
That thy clatter might be silenced.”<br/>
Then he whipped his fiery charger,<br/>
And the steed flew onward swiftly,<br/>
On the upper of the highways,<br/>
To the court-yard on the summit.<br/>
When the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Had approached the upper court-yard,<br/>
Uttered he the words that follow:<br/>
“O thou Hisi, stuff this watch-dog,<br/>
Lempo, stuff his throat and nostrils,<br/>
Close the mouth of this wild barker,<br/>
Bridle well the vicious canine,<br/>
That the watcher may be silent<br/>
While the hero passes by him.”<br/>
Then he stepped within the court-room,<br/>
With his whip he struck the flooring,<br/>
From the floor arose a vapor,<br/>
In the fog appeared a pigmy,<br/>
Who unhitched the royal racer,<br/>
From his back removed the harness,<br/>
Gave the weary steed attention.<br/>
Then the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Carefully advanced and listened.<br/>
No one saw the strange magician,<br/>
No one heard his cautious footsteps;<br/>
Heard he songs within the dwelling,<br/>
Through the moss-stuffed chinks heard voices.<br/>
Through the walls he beard them singing,<br/>
Through the doors the peals of laughter.<br/>
Then he spied within the court-rooms,<br/>
Lurking slyly in the hall-ways,<br/>
Found the court-rooms filled with singers,<br/>
By the walls were players seated,<br/>
Near the doors the wise men hovered,<br/>
Skilful ones upon the benches,<br/>
Near the fires the wicked wizards;<br/>
All were singing songs of Lapland,<br/>
Singing songs of evil Hisi.<br/>
Now the minstrel, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Changes both his form and stature,<br/>
Passes through the inner door-ways,<br/>
Enters he the spacious court-hall,<br/>
And these words the hero utters:<br/>
“Fine the singing quickly ending,<br/>
Good the song that quickly ceases;<br/>
Better far to keep thy wisdom<br/>
Than to sing it on the house-tops.”<br/>
Comes the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Fleetly rushing through the door-way,<br/>
To the centre of the court-room,<br/>
And addresses thus the stranger:<br/>
Formerly a dog lay watching,<br/>
Was a cur of iron-color,<br/>
Fond of flesh, a bone-devourer,<br/>
Loved to lick the blood of strangers.<br/>
Who then art thou of the heroes,<br/>
Who of all the host of heroes,<br/>
That thou art within my court-rooms,<br/>
That thou comest to my dwelling,<br/>
Was not seen without my portals,<br/>
Was not scented by my watch-dogs?<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Do not think that I come hither<br/>
Having neither wit nor wisdom,<br/>
Having neither art nor power,<br/>
Wanting in ancestral knowledge,<br/>
Lacking prudence of the fathers,<br/>
That thy watch-dogs may devour me.<br/>
“My devoted mother washed me,<br/>
When a frail and tender baby,<br/>
Three times in the nights of summer,<br/>
Nine times in the nights of autumn,<br/>
That upon my journeys northward<br/>
I might sing the ancient wisdom,<br/>
Thus protect myself from danger;<br/>
When at home I sing as wisely<br/>
As the minstrels of thy hamlet.”<br/>
Then the singer, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Ancient hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Quick began his incantations,<br/>
Straightway sang the songs of witchcraft,<br/>
From his fur-robe darts the lightning,<br/>
Flames outshooting from his eye-balls,<br/>
From the magic of his singing<br/>
From his wonderful enchantment.<br/>
Sang the very best of singers<br/>
To the very worst of minstrels,<br/>
Filled their mouths with dust and ashes,<br/>
Piled the rocks upon their shoulders,<br/>
Stilled the best of Lapland witches,<br/>
Stilled the sorcerers and wizards.<br/>
Then he banished all their heroes,<br/>
Banished all their proudest minstrels,<br/>
This one hither, that one thither,<br/>
To the lowlands poor in verdure,<br/>
To the unproductive uplands,<br/>
To the oceans wanting whiting,<br/>
To the waterfalls of Rutya,<br/>
To the whirlpool hot and flaming,<br/>
To the waters decked with sea-foam,<br/>
Into fires and boiling waters,<br/>
Into everlasting torment.<br/>
Then the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Sang the foemen with their broadswords?<br/>
Sang the heroes with their weapons,<br/>
Sang the eldest, sang the youngest,<br/>
Sang the middle-aged, enchanted;<br/>
Only one he left his senses,<br/>
He a poor, defenseless shepherd,<br/>
Old and sightless, halt and wretched,<br/>
And the old man’s name was Nasshut.<br/>
Spake the miserable shepherd:<br/>
“Thou hast old and young enchanted,<br/>
Thou hast banished all our heroes,<br/>
Why hast spared this wretched shepherd?”<br/>
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:<br/>
“Therefore have I not bewitched thee:<br/>
Thou art old, and blind, and wretched<br/>
Feeble-minded thou, and harmless,<br/>
Loathsome now without my magic.<br/>
Thou didst, in thy better life-time,<br/>
When a shepherd filled with malice,<br/>
Ruin all thy mother’s berries,<br/>
Make thy sister, too unworthy,<br/>
Ruin all thy brother’s cattle,<br/>
Drive to death thy father’s stallions,<br/>
Through the marshes, o’er the meadows,<br/>
Through the lowlands, o’er the mountains,<br/>
Heeding not thy mother’s counsel.”<br/>
Thereupon the wretched Nasshut,<br/>
Angry grew and swore for vengeance,<br/>
Straightway limping through the door-way,<br/>
Hobbled on beyond the court-yard,<br/>
O’er the meadow-lands and pastures,<br/>
To the river of the death-land,<br/>
To the holy stream and whirlpool,<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
To the islands of Manala;<br/>
Waited there for Kaukomieli,<br/>
Listened long for Lemminkainen,<br/>
Thinking he must pass this river<br/>
On his journey to his country,<br/>
On. the highway to the islands,<br/>
From the upper shores of Pohya,<br/>
From the dreary Sariola.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap13"/>RUNE XIII.<br/>
LEMMINIKAINEN’S SECOND WOOING.</h2>
<p>Spake the ancient Lemminkainen<br/>
To the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Give to me thy lovely daughter,<br/>
Bring me now thy winsome maiden,<br/>
Bring the best of Lapland virgins,<br/>
Fairest virgin of the Northland.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Answered thus the wild magician:<br/>
“I shall never give my daughter,<br/>
Never give my fairest maiden,<br/>
Not the best one, nor the worst one,<br/>
Not the largest, nor the smallest;<br/>
Thou hast now one wife-companion,<br/>
Thou has taken hence one hostess,<br/>
Carried off the fair Kyllikki.”<br/>
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:<br/>
To my home I took Kyllikki,<br/>
To my cottage on the island,<br/>
To my entry-gates and kindred;<br/>
Now I wish a better hostess,<br/>
Straightway bring thy fairest daughter,<br/>
Worthiest of all thy virgins,<br/>
Fairest maid with sable tresses.”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Never will I give my daughter<br/>
To a hero false and worthless,<br/>
To a minstrel vain and evil;<br/>
Therefore, pray thou for my maiden,<br/>
Therefore, woo the sweet-faced flower,<br/>
When thou bringest me the wild-moose<br/>
From the Hisi fields and forests.”<br/>
Then the artful Lemminkainen<br/>
Deftly whittled out his javelins,<br/>
Quickly made his leathern bow-string,<br/>
And prepared his bow and arrows,<br/>
And soliloquized as follows:<br/>
“Now my javelins are made ready,<br/>
All my arrows too are ready,<br/>
And my oaken cross-bow bended,<br/>
But my snow-shoes are not builded,<br/>
Who will make me worthy snow-shoes?”<br/>
Lemminkainen, grave and thoughtful,<br/>
Long reflected, well considered,<br/>
Where the snow-shoes could be fashioned,<br/>
Who the artist that could make them;<br/>
Hastened to the Kauppi-smithy,<br/>
To the smithy of Lylikki,<br/>
Thus addressed the snow-shoe artist:<br/>
“O thou skilful Woyalander,<br/>
Kauppi, ablest smith of Lapland,<br/>
Make me quick two worthy snow-shoes,<br/>
Smooth them well and make them hardy,<br/>
That in Tapio the wild-moose,<br/>
Roaming through the Hisi-forests,<br/>
I may catch and bring to Louhi,<br/>
As a dowry for her daughter.”<br/>
Then Lylikki thus made answer,<br/>
Kauppi gave this prompt decision:<br/>
“Lemminkainen, reckless minstrel,<br/>
Thou wilt hunt in vain the wild-moose,<br/>
Thou wilt catch but pain and torture,<br/>
In the Hisi fens and forests.”<br/>
Little heeding, Lemminkainen<br/>
Spake these measures to Lylikki<br/>
“Make for me the worthy snow-shoes,<br/>
Quickly work and make them ready;<br/>
Go I will and catch the blue-moose<br/>
Where in Tapio it browses,<br/>
In the Hisi woods and snow-fields.”<br/>
Then Lylikki, snow-shoe-maker,<br/>
Ancient Kauppi, master artist,<br/>
Whittled in the fall his show-shoes,<br/>
Smoothed them in the winter evenings,<br/>
One day working on the runners,<br/>
All the next day making stick-rings,<br/>
Till at last the shoes were finished,<br/>
And the workmanship was perfect.<br/>
Then he fastened well the shoe-straps,<br/>
Smooth as adder’s skin the woodwork,<br/>
Soft as fox-fur were the stick-rings;<br/>
Oiled he well his wondrous snow-shoes<br/>
With the tallow of the reindeer;<br/>
When he thus soliloquizes,<br/>
These the accents of Lylikki:<br/>
“Is there any youth in Lapland,<br/>
Any in this generation,<br/>
That can travel in these snow-shoes,<br/>
That can move the lower sections?”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Full of hope, and life, and vigor:<br/>
Surely there is one in Lapland.<br/>
In this rising generation,<br/>
That can travel in these snow-shoes,<br/>
That the right and left can manage.”<br/>
To his back he tied the quiver,<br/>
Placed the bow upon his shoulder,<br/>
With both hands he grasped his snow-cane,<br/>
Speaking meanwhile words as follow:<br/>
“There is nothing in the woodlands,<br/>
Nothing in the world of Ukko,<br/>
Nothing underneath the heavens,<br/>
In the uplands, in the lowlands,<br/>
Nothing in the snow-fields running,<br/>
Not a fleet deer of the forest,<br/>
That could not be overtaken<br/>
With the snow-shoes of Lylikki,<br/>
With the strides of Lemminkainen.”<br/>
Wicked Hisi heard these measures,<br/>
Juntas listened to their echoes;<br/>
Straightway Hisi called the wild-moose,<br/>
Juutas fashioned soon a reindeer,<br/>
And the head was made of punk-wood,<br/>
Horns of naked willow branches,<br/>
Feet were furnished by the rushes,<br/>
And the legs, by reeds aquatic,<br/>
Veins were made of withered grasses,<br/>
Eyes, from daisies of the meadows,<br/>
Ears were formed of water-flowers,<br/>
And the skin of tawny fir-bark,<br/>
Out of sappy wood, the muscles,<br/>
Fair and fleet, the magic reindeer.<br/>
Juutas thus instructs the wild-moose,<br/>
These the words of wicked Hisi:<br/>
Flee away, thou moose of Juutas,<br/>
Flee away, thou Hisi-reindeer,<br/>
Like the winds, thou rapid courser,<br/>
To the snow-homes of the ranger,<br/>
To the ridges of the mountains,<br/>
To the snow-capped hills of Lapland,<br/>
That thy hunter may be worn out,<br/>
Thy pursuer be tormented,<br/>
Lemminkainen be exhausted.”<br/>
Thereupon the Hisi-reindeer,<br/>
Juutas-moose with branching antlers,<br/>
Fleetly ran through fen and forest,<br/>
Over Lapland’s hills and valleys,<br/>
Through the open fields and court-yards,<br/>
Through the penthouse doors and gate-ways,<br/>
Turning over tubs of water,<br/>
Threw the kettles from the fire-pole,<br/>
And upset the dishes cooking.<br/>
Then arose a fearful uproar,<br/>
In the court-yards of Pohyola,<br/>
Lapland-dogs began their barking,<br/>
Lapland-children cried in terror,<br/>
Lapland-women roared with laughter,<br/>
And the Lapland-heroes shouted.<br/>
Fleetly followed Lemminkainen,<br/>
Followed fast, and followed faster,<br/>
Hastened on behind the wild-moose,<br/>
Over swamps and through the woodlands,<br/>
Over snow-fields vast and pathless,<br/>
Over high uprising mountains,<br/>
Fire out-shooting from his runners,<br/>
Smoke arising from his snow-cane:<br/>
Could not hear the wild-moose bounding,<br/>
Could not sight the flying fleet-foot;<br/>
Glided on through field and forest,<br/>
Glided over lakes and rivers,<br/>
Over lands beyond the smooth-sea,<br/>
Through the desert plains of Hisi,<br/>
Glided o’er the plains of Kalma,<br/>
Through the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
To the end of Kalma’s empire,<br/>
Where the jaws of Death stand open,<br/>
Where the head of Kalma lowers,<br/>
Ready to devour the stranger,<br/>
To devour wild Lemminkainen;<br/>
But Tuoni cannot reach him,<br/>
Kalma cannot overtake him.<br/>
Distant woods are yet untraveled,<br/>
Far away a woodland corner<br/>
Stands unsearched by Kaukomieli,<br/>
In the North’s extensive, borders,<br/>
In the realm of dreary Lapland.<br/>
Now the hero, on his snow-shoes,<br/>
Hastens to the distant woodlands,<br/>
There to hunt the moose of Piru.<br/>
As he nears the woodland corner,<br/>
There he bears a frightful uproar,<br/>
From the Northland’s distant borders,<br/>
From the dreary fields of Lapland,<br/>
Hears the dogs as they are barking,<br/>
Hears the children loudly screaming,<br/>
Hears the laughter or the women,<br/>
Hears the shouting of the heroes.<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Hastens forward on his snow-shoes,<br/>
To the place where dogs are barking,<br/>
To the distant woods of Lapland.<br/>
When the reckless Kaukomieli<br/>
Had approached this Hisi corner,<br/>
Straightway he began to question:<br/>
“Why this laughter or the women,<br/>
Why the screaming of the children,<br/>
Why the shouting of the heroes,<br/>
Why this barking of the watch-dogs?<br/>
This reply was promptly given:<br/>
“This the reason for this uproar,<br/>
Women laughing, children screaming,<br/>
Heroes shouting, watch-dogs barking<br/>
Hisi’s moose came running hither,<br/>
Hither came the Piru-Reindeer,<br/>
Hither came with hoofs of silver,<br/>
Through the open fields and court-yards,<br/>
Through the penthouse doors and gate-ways,<br/>
Turning over tubs or water,<br/>
Threw the kettles from the fire-pole,<br/>
And upset the dishes cooking.”<br/>
Then the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Straightway summoned all his courage,<br/>
Pushed ahead his mighty snow-shoes,<br/>
Swift as adders in the stubble,<br/>
Levelled bushes in the marshes,<br/>
Like the swift and fiery serpents,<br/>
Spake these words of magic import,<br/>
Keeping balance with his snow-staff:<br/>
Come thou might of Lapland heroes,<br/>
Bring to me the moose of Juutas;<br/>
Come thou strength of Lapland-women,<br/>
And prepare the boiling caldron;<br/>
Come, thou might of Lapland children,<br/>
Bring together fire and fuel;<br/>
Come, thou strength of Lapland-kettles,<br/>
Help to boil the Hisi wild-moose.”<br/>
Then with mighty force and courage,<br/>
Lemminkainen hastened onward,<br/>
Striking backward, shooting forward;<br/>
With a long sweep of his snow-shoe,<br/>
Disappeared from view the hero;<br/>
With the second, shooting further,<br/>
Was the hunter out of hearing,<br/>
With the third the hero glided<br/>
On the shoulders of the wild-moose;<br/>
Took a pole of stoutest oak-wood,<br/>
Took some bark-strings from the willow,<br/>
Wherewithal to bind the moose-deer,<br/>
Bind him to his oaken hurdle.<br/>
To the moose he spake as follows:<br/>
“Here remain, thou moose of Juutas<br/>
Skip about, my bounding courser,<br/>
In my hurdle jump and frolic,<br/>
Captive from the fields of Piru,<br/>
From the Hisi glens and mountains.”<br/>
Then he stroked the captured wild-moose,<br/>
Patted him upon his forehead,<br/>
Spake again in measured accents:<br/>
“I would like awhile to linger,<br/>
I would love to rest a moment<br/>
In the cottage of my maiden,<br/>
With my virgin, young and lovely.”<br/>
Then the Hisi-moose grew angry,<br/>
Stamped his feet and shook his antlers,<br/>
Spake these words to Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Surely Lempo soon will got thee,<br/>
Shouldst thou sit beside the maiden,<br/>
Shouldst thou linger by the virgin.”<br/>
Now the wild-moose stamps and rushes,<br/>
Tears in two the bands of willow,<br/>
Breaks the oak-wood pole in pieces,<br/>
And upturns the hunter’s hurdle,<br/>
Quickly leaping from his captor,<br/>
Bounds away with strength of freedom,<br/>
Over hills and over lowlands,<br/>
Over swamps and over snow-fields,<br/>
Over mountains clothed in heather,<br/>
That the eye may not behold him,<br/>
Nor the hero’s ear detect him.<br/>
Thereupon the mighty hunter<br/>
Angry grows, and much disheartened,<br/>
Starts again the moose to capture,<br/>
Gliding off behind the courser.<br/>
With his might he plunges forward;<br/>
At the instep breaks his snow-shoe,<br/>
Breaks the runners into fragments,<br/>
On the mountings breaks his javelins,<br/>
In the centre breaks his snow-staff,<br/>
And the moose bounds on before him,<br/>
Through the Hisi-woods and snow-fields,<br/>
Out of reach of Lemminkainen.<br/>
Then the reckless Kaukomieli<br/>
Looked with bended head, ill-humored,<br/>
One by one upon the fragments,<br/>
Speaking words of ancient wisdom:<br/>
“Northland hunters, never, never,<br/>
Go defiant to thy forests,<br/>
In the Hisi vales and mountains,<br/>
There to hunt the moose of Juutas,<br/>
Like this senseless, reckless hero;<br/>
I have wrecked my magic snow-shoes,<br/>
Ruined too my useful snow-staff,<br/>
And my javelins I have broken,<br/>
While the wild-moose runs in safety<br/>
Through the Hisi fields and forests.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap14"/>RUNE XIV.<br/>
DEATH OF LEMMINKAINEN.</h2>
<p>Lemminkainen, much disheartened,<br/>
Deeply thought and long considered,<br/>
What to do, what course to follow,<br/>
Whether best to leave the wild-moose<br/>
In the fastnesses of Hisi,<br/>
And return to Kalevala,<br/>
Or a third time hunt the ranger,<br/>
Hoping thus to bring him captive,<br/>
Thus return at last a victor<br/>
To the forest home of Louhi,<br/>
To the joy of all her daughters,<br/>
To the wood-nymph’s happy fireside.<br/>
Taking courage Lemminkainen<br/>
Spake these words in supplication:<br/>
“Ukko, thou O God above me,<br/>
Thou Creator of the heavens,<br/>
Put my snow-shoes well in order,<br/>
And endow them both with swiftness,<br/>
That I rapidly may journey<br/>
Over marshes, over snow-fields,<br/>
Over lowlands, over highlands,<br/>
Through the realms of wicked Hisi,<br/>
Through the distant plains of Lapland,<br/>
Through the paths of Lempo’s wild-moose,<br/>
To the forest hills of Juutas.<br/>
To the snow-fields shall I journey,<br/>
Leave the heroes to the woodlands,<br/>
On the way to Tapiola,<br/>
Into Tapio’s wild dwellings.<br/>
“Greeting bring I to the mountains,<br/>
Greeting to the vales and uplands,<br/>
Greet ye, heights with forests covered,<br/>
Greet ye, ever-verdant fir-trees,<br/>
Greet ye, groves of whitened aspen,<br/>
Greetings bring to those that greet you,<br/>
Fields, and streams, and woods of Lapland.<br/>
Bring me favor, mountain-woodlands,<br/>
Lapland-deserts, show me kindness,<br/>
Mighty Tapio, be gracious,<br/>
Let me wander through thy forests,<br/>
Let me glide along thy rivers,<br/>
Let this hunter search thy snow-fields,<br/>
Where the wild-moose herds in numbers<br/>
Where the bounding reindeer lingers.<br/>
“O Nyrikki, mountain hero,<br/>
Son of Tapio of forests,<br/>
Hero with the scarlet head-gear,<br/>
Notches make along the pathway,<br/>
Landmarks upward to the mountains,<br/>
That this hunter may not wander,<br/>
May not fall, and falling perish<br/>
In the snow-fields of thy kingdom,<br/>
Hunting for the moose of Hisi,<br/>
Dowry for the pride of Northland.<br/>
“Mistress of the woods, Mielikki,<br/>
Forest-mother, formed in beauty,<br/>
Let thy gold flow out abundant,<br/>
Let thy silver onward wander,<br/>
For the hero that is seeking<br/>
For the wild-moose of thy kingdom;<br/>
Bring me here thy keys of silver,<br/>
From the golden girdle round thee;<br/>
Open Tapio’s rich chambers,<br/>
And unlock the forest fortress,<br/>
While I here await the booty,<br/>
While I hunt the moose of Lempo.<br/>
“Should this service be too menial<br/>
Give the order to thy servants,<br/>
Send at once thy servant-maidens,<br/>
And command it to thy people.<br/>
Thou wilt never seem a hostess,<br/>
If thou hast not in thy service,<br/>
Maidens ready by the hundreds,<br/>
Thousands that await thy bidding,<br/>
Who thy herds may watch and nurture,<br/>
Tend the game of thy dominions.<br/>
“Tall and slender forest-virgin,<br/>
Tapio’s beloved daughter,<br/>
Blow thou now thy honey flute-notes,<br/>
Play upon thy forest-whistle,<br/>
For the hearing of thy mistress,<br/>
For thy charming woodland-mistress,<br/>
Make her hear thy sweet-toned playing,<br/>
That she may arise from slumber.<br/>
Should thy mistress not awaken<br/>
At the calling of thy flute-notes,<br/>
Play again, and play unceasing,<br/>
Make the golden tongue re-echo.”<br/>
Wild and daring Lemminkainen<br/>
Steadfast prays upon his journey,<br/>
Calling on the gods for succor,<br/>
Hastens off through fields and moorlands,<br/>
Passes on through cruel brush-wood,<br/>
To the colliery of Hisi,<br/>
To the burning fields of Lempo;<br/>
Glided one day, then a second,<br/>
Glided all the next day onward,<br/>
Till he came to Big-stone mountain,<br/>
Climbed upon its rocky summit,<br/>
Turned his glances to the north-west,<br/>
Toward the Northland moors and marshes;<br/>
There appeared the Tapio-mansion.<br/>
All the doors were golden-colored,<br/>
Shining in the gleam of sunlight<br/>
Through the thickets on the mountains,<br/>
Through the distant fields of Northland.<br/>
Lemminkainen, much encouraged,<br/>
Hastens onward from his station<br/>
Through the lowlands, o’er the uplands,<br/>
Over snow-fields vast and vacant,<br/>
Under snow-robed firs and aspens,<br/>
Hastens forward, happy-hearted,<br/>
Quickly reaches Tapio’s court-yards,<br/>
Halts without at Tapio’s windows,<br/>
Slyly looks into her mansion,<br/>
Spies within some kindly women,<br/>
Forest-dames outstretched before him,<br/>
All are clad in scanty raiment,<br/>
Dressed in soiled and ragged linens.<br/>
Spake the stranger Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Wherefore sit ye, forest-mothers,<br/>
In your old and simple garments,<br/>
In your soiled and ragged linen?<br/>
Ye, forsooth! are too untidy,<br/>
Too unsightly your appearance<br/>
In your tattered gowns appareled.<br/>
When I lived within the forest,<br/>
There were then three mountain castles,<br/>
One of horn and one of ivory,<br/>
And the third of wood constructed;<br/>
In their walls were golden windows,<br/>
Six the windows in each castle,<br/>
Through these windows I discovered<br/>
All the host of Tapio’s mansion,<br/>
Saw its fair and stately hostess;<br/>
Saw great Tapio’s lovely daughter,<br/>
Saw Tellervo in her beauty,<br/>
With her train of charming maidens;<br/>
All were dressed in golden raiment,<br/>
Rustled all in gold and silver.<br/>
Then the forest’s queenly hostess,<br/>
Still the hostess of these woodlands,<br/>
On her arms wore golden bracelets,<br/>
Golden rings upon her fingers,<br/>
In her hair were sparkling, jewels,<br/>
On her bead were golden fillets,<br/>
In her ears were golden ear-rings,<br/>
On her neck a pearly necklace,<br/>
And her braidlets, silver-tinselled.<br/>
“Lovely hostess of the forest,<br/>
Metsola’s enchanting mistress,<br/>
Fling aside thine ugly straw-shoes,<br/>
Cast away the shoes of birch-bark,<br/>
Doff thy soiled and ragged linen,<br/>
Doff thy gown of shabby fabric,<br/>
Don the bright and festive raiment,<br/>
Don the gown of merry-making,<br/>
While I stay within thy borders,<br/>
While I seek my forest-booty,<br/>
Hunt the moose of evil Hisi.<br/>
Here my visit will be irksome,<br/>
Here thy guest will be ill-humored,<br/>
Waiting in thy fields and woodlands,<br/>
Hunting here the moose of Lempo,<br/>
Finding not the Hisi-ranger,<br/>
Shouldst thou give me no enjoyment,<br/>
Should I find no joy, nor respite.<br/>
Long the eve that gives no pleasure,<br/>
Long the day that brings no guerdon!<br/>
“Sable-bearded god of forests,<br/>
In thy hat and coat of ermine,<br/>
Robe thy trees in finest fibers,<br/>
Deck thy groves in richest fabrics,<br/>
Give the fir-trees shining silver,<br/>
Deck with gold the slender balsams,<br/>
Give the spruces copper belting,<br/>
And the pine-trees silver girdles,<br/>
Give the birches golden flowers,<br/>
Deck their stems with silver fret-work,<br/>
This their garb in former ages,<br/>
When the days and nights were brighter,<br/>
When the fir-trees shone like sunlight,<br/>
And the birches like the moonbeams;<br/>
Honey breathed throughout the forest,<br/>
Settled in the glens and highlands<br/>
Spices in the meadow-borders,<br/>
Oil out-pouring from the lowlands.<br/>
“Forest daughter, lovely virgin,<br/>
Golden maiden, fair Tulikki,<br/>
Second of the Tapio-daughters,<br/>
Drive the game within these borders,<br/>
To these far-extending snow-fields.<br/>
Should the reindeer be too sluggish,<br/>
Should the moose-deer move too slowly<br/>
Cut a birch-rod from the thicket,<br/>
Whip them hither in their beauty,<br/>
Drive the wild-moose to my hurdle,<br/>
Hither drive the long-sought booty<br/>
To the hunter who is watching,<br/>
Waiting in the Hisi-forests.<br/>
“When the game has started hither,<br/>
Keep them in the proper highway,<br/>
Hold thy magic hands before them,<br/>
Guard them well on either road-side,<br/>
That the elk may not escape thee,<br/>
May not dart adown some by-path.<br/>
Should, perchance, the moose-deer wander<br/>
Through some by-way of the forest,<br/>
Take him by the ears and antlers,<br/>
Hither lead the pride of Lempo.<br/>
“If the path be filled with brush-wood<br/>
Cast the brush-wood to the road-side;<br/>
If the branches cross his pathway,<br/>
Break the branches into fragments;<br/>
Should a fence of fir or alder<br/>
Cross the way that leads him hither.<br/>
Make an opening within it,<br/>
Open nine obstructing fences;<br/>
If the way be crossed by streamlets,<br/>
If the path be stopped by rivers,<br/>
Make a bridge of silken fabric,<br/>
Weaving webs of scarlet color,<br/>
Drive the deer-herd gently over,<br/>
Lead them gently o’er the waters,<br/>
O’er the rivers of thy forests,<br/>
O’er the streams of thy dominions.<br/>
“Thou, the host of Tapio’s mansion,<br/>
Gracious host of Tapiola,<br/>
Sable-bearded god of woodlands,<br/>
Golden lord of Northland forests,<br/>
Thou, O Tapio’s worthy hostess,<br/>
Queen of snowy woods, Mimerkki,<br/>
Ancient dame in sky-blue vesture,<br/>
Fenland-queen in scarlet ribbons,<br/>
Come I to exchange my silver,<br/>
To exchange my gold and silver;<br/>
Gold I have, as old as moonlight,<br/>
Silver of the age of sunshine,<br/>
In the first of years was gathered,<br/>
In the heat and pain of battle;<br/>
It will rust within my pouches,<br/>
Soon will wear away and perish,<br/>
If it be not used in trading.”<br/>
Long the hunter, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Glided through the fen and forest,<br/>
Sang his songs throughout the woodlands,<br/>
Through three mountain glens be sang them,<br/>
Sang the forest hostess friendly,<br/>
Sang he, also, Tapio friendly,<br/>
Friendly, all the forest virgins,<br/>
All of Metsola’s fair daughters.<br/>
Now they start the herds of Lempo,<br/>
Start the wild-moose from his shelter,<br/>
In the realms of evil Hisi,<br/>
Tapio’s highest mountain-region;<br/>
Now they drive the ranger homeward,<br/>
To the open courts of Piru,<br/>
To the hero that is waiting,<br/>
Hunting for the moose of Juutas.<br/>
When the herd had reached the castle,<br/>
Lemminkainen threw his lasso<br/>
O’er the antlers of the blue-moose,<br/>
Settled on the neck and shoulders<br/>
Of the mighty moose of Hisi.<br/>
Then the hunter, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Stroked his captive’s neck in safety,<br/>
For the moose was well-imprisoned.<br/>
Thereupon gay Lemminkainen<br/>
Filled with joyance spake as follows:<br/>
“Pride of forests, queen of woodlands,<br/>
Metsola’s enchanted hostess,<br/>
Lovely forest dame, Mielikki,<br/>
Mother-donor of the mountains,<br/>
Take the gold that I have promised,<br/>
Come and take away the silver;<br/>
Spread thy kerchief well before me,<br/>
Spread out here thy silken neck-wrap,<br/>
Underneath the golden treasure,<br/>
Underneath the shining silver,<br/>
that to earth it may not settle,<br/>
Scattered on the snows of winter.”<br/>
Then the hero went a victor<br/>
To the dwellings of Pohyola,<br/>
And addressed these words to Louhi:<br/>
“I have caught the moose of Hisi,<br/>
In the Metsola-dominions,<br/>
Give, O hostess, give thy daughter,<br/>
Give to me thy fairest virgin,<br/>
Bride of mine to be hereafter.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Gave this answer to the suitor:<br/>
“I will give to thee my daughter,<br/>
For thy wife my fairest maiden,<br/>
When for me thou’lt put a bridle<br/>
On the flaming horse of Hisi,<br/>
Rapid messenger of Lempo,<br/>
On the Hisi-plains and pastures.”<br/>
Nothing daunted, Lemminkainen<br/>
Hastened forward to accomplish<br/>
Louhi’s second test of heroes,<br/>
On the cultivated lowlands,<br/>
On the sacred fields and forests.<br/>
Everywhere he sought the racer,<br/>
Sought the fire-expiring stallion,<br/>
Fire out-shooting from his nostrils.<br/>
Lemminkainen, fearless hunter,<br/>
Bearing in his belt his bridle,<br/>
On his shoulders, reins and halter,<br/>
Sought one day, and then a second,<br/>
Finally, upon the third day,<br/>
Went he to the Hisi-mountain,<br/>
Climbed, and struggled to the summit;<br/>
To the east he turned his glances,<br/>
Cast his eyes upon the sunrise,<br/>
There beheld the flaming courser,<br/>
On the heath among the far-trees.<br/>
Lempo’s fire-expiring stallion<br/>
Fire and mingled smoke, out-shooting<br/>
From his mouth, and eyes, and nostrils.<br/>
Spake the daring Lemminkainen,<br/>
This the hero’s supplication:<br/>
“Ukko, thou O God above me,<br/>
Thou that rulest all the storm-clouds,<br/>
Open thou the vault of heaven,<br/>
Open windows through the ether,<br/>
Let the icy rain come falling,<br/>
Lot the heavy hailstones shower<br/>
On the flaming horse of Hisi,<br/>
On the fire-expiring stallion.”<br/>
Ukko, the benign Creator,<br/>
Heard the prayer of Lemminkainen,<br/>
Broke apart the dome of heaven,<br/>
Rent the heights of heaven asunder,<br/>
Sent the iron-hail in showers,<br/>
Smaller than the heads of horses,<br/>
Larger than the heads of heroes,<br/>
On the flaming steed of Lempo,<br/>
On the fire-expiring stallion,<br/>
On the terror of the Northland.<br/>
Lemminkainen, drawing nearer,<br/>
Looked with care upon the courser,<br/>
Then he spake the words that follow:<br/>
“Wonder-steed of mighty Hisi,<br/>
Flaming horse of Lempo’s mountain,<br/>
Bring thy mouth of gold, assenting,<br/>
Gently place thy head of silver<br/>
In this bright and golden halter,<br/>
In this silver-mounted bridle.<br/>
I shall never harshly treat thee,<br/>
Never make thee fly too fleetly,<br/>
On the way to Sariola,<br/>
On the tracks of long duration,<br/>
To the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
To her magic courts and stables,<br/>
Will not lash thee on thy journey;<br/>
I shall lead thee gently forward,<br/>
Drive thee with the reins of kindness,<br/>
Cover thee with silken blankets.”<br/>
Then the fire-haired steed of Juutas,<br/>
Flaming horse of mighty Hisi,<br/>
Put his bead of shining silver,<br/>
In the bright and golden bead-stall,<br/>
In the silver-mounted bridle.<br/>
Thus the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Easy bridles Lempo’s stallion,<br/>
Flaming horse of evil Piru;<br/>
Lays the bits within his fire-mouth,<br/>
On his silver head, the halter,<br/>
Mounts the fire-expiring courser,<br/>
Brandishes his whip of willow,<br/>
Hastens forward on his journey,<br/>
Bounding o’er the hills and mountains,<br/>
Dashing through the valleys northward,<br/>
O’er the snow-capped hills of Lapland,<br/>
To the courts of Sariola.<br/>
Then the hero, quick dismounting,<br/>
Stepped within the court of Louhi,<br/>
Thus addressed the Northland hostess:<br/>
“I have bridled Lempo’s fire-horse,<br/>
I have caught the Hisi-racer,<br/>
Caught the fire-expiring stallion,<br/>
In the Piru plains and pastures,<br/>
Ridden him within thy borders;<br/>
I have caught the moose of Lempo,<br/>
I have done what thou demandest;<br/>
Give, I pray thee, now thy daughter,<br/>
Give to me thy fairest maiden,<br/>
Bride of mine to be forever.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Made this answer to the suitor:<br/>
“I will only give my daughter,<br/>
Give to thee my fairest virgin,<br/>
Bride of thine to be forever,<br/>
When for me the swan thou killest<br/>
In the river of Tuoni,<br/>
Swimming in the black death-river,<br/>
In the sacred stream and whirlpool;<br/>
Thou canst try one cross-bow only,<br/>
But one arrow from thy quiver.”<br/>
Then the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Braved the third test of the hero,<br/>
Started out to hunt the wild-swan,<br/>
Hunt the long-necked, graceful swimmer,<br/>
In Tuoni’s coal-black river,<br/>
In Manala’s lower regions.<br/>
Quick the daring hunter journeyed,<br/>
Hastened off with fearless footsteps,<br/>
To the river of Tuoni,<br/>
To the sacred stream and whirlpool,<br/>
With his bow upon his shoulder,<br/>
With his quiver and one arrow.<br/>
Nasshut, blind and crippled shepherd,<br/>
Wretched shepherd of Pohyola,<br/>
Stood beside the death-land river,<br/>
Near the sacred stream and whirlpool,<br/>
Guarding Tuonela’s waters,<br/>
Waiting there for Lemminkainen,<br/>
Listening there for Kaukomieli,<br/>
Waiting long the hero’s coming.<br/>
Finally he hears the footsteps<br/>
Of the hero on his journey,<br/>
Hears the tread of Lemminkainen,<br/>
As he journeys nearer, nearer,<br/>
To the river of Tuoni,<br/>
To the cataract of death-land,<br/>
To the sacred stream and whirlpool.<br/>
Quick the wretched shepherd, Nasshut,<br/>
From the death-stream sends a serpent,<br/>
Like an arrow from a cross-bow,<br/>
To the heart of Lemminkainen,<br/>
Through the vitals of the hero.<br/>
Lemminkainen, little conscious,<br/>
Hardly knew that be was injured,<br/>
Spake these measures as he perished.<br/>
“Ah! unworthy is my conduct,<br/>
Ah! unwisely have I acted,<br/>
That I did not heed my mother,<br/>
Did not take her goodly counsel,<br/>
Did not learn her words of magic.<br/>
Oh I for three words with my mother,<br/>
How to live, and bow to suffer,<br/>
In this time of dire misfortune,<br/>
How to bear the stings of serpents,<br/>
Tortures of the reed of waters,<br/>
From the stream of Tuonela!<br/>
“Ancient mother who hast borne me,<br/>
Who hast trained me from my childhood,<br/>
Learn, I pray thee, where I linger,<br/>
Where alas! thy son is lying,<br/>
Where thy reckless hero suffers.<br/>
Come, I pray thee, faithful mother,<br/>
Come thou quickly, thou art needed,<br/>
Come deliver me from torture,<br/>
From the death-jaws of Tuoni,<br/>
From the sacred stream and whirlpool.”<br/>
Northland’s old and wretched shepherd,<br/>
Nasshut, the despised protector<br/>
Of the flocks of Sariola,<br/>
Throws the dying Lemminkainen,<br/>
Throws the hero of the islands,<br/>
Into Tuonela’s river,<br/>
To the blackest stream of death-land,<br/>
To the worst of fatal whirlpools.<br/>
Lemminkainen, wild and daring,<br/>
Helpless falls upon the waters,<br/>
Floating down the coal-black current,<br/>
Through the cataract and rapids<br/>
To the tombs of Tuonela.<br/>
There the blood-stained son of death-land,<br/>
There Tuoni’s son and hero,<br/>
Cuts in pieces Lemminkainen,<br/>
Chops him with his mighty hatchet,<br/>
Till the sharpened axe strikes flint-sparks<br/>
From the rocks within his chamber,<br/>
Chops the hero into fragments,<br/>
Into five unequal portions,<br/>
Throws each portion to Tuoni,<br/>
In Manala’s lowest kingdom,<br/>
Speaks these words when he has ended:<br/>
“Swim thou there, wild Lemminkainen,<br/>
Flow thou onward in this river,<br/>
Hunt forever in these waters,<br/>
With thy cross-bow and thine arrow,<br/>
Shoot the swan within this empire,<br/>
Shoot our water-birds in welcome!”<br/>
Thus the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Thus the handsome Kaukomieli,<br/>
The untiring suitor, dieth<br/>
In the river of Tuoni,<br/>
In the death-realm of Manala.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap15"/>RUNE XV.<br/>
LEMMINKAINEN’S RESTORATION.</h2>
<p>Lemminkainen’s aged mother<br/>
Anxious roams about the islands,<br/>
Anxious wonders in her chambers,<br/>
What the fate of Lemminkainen,<br/>
Why her son so long has tarried;<br/>
Thinks that something ill has happened<br/>
To her hero in Pohyola.<br/>
Sad, indeed, the mother’s anguish,<br/>
As in vain she waits his coming,<br/>
As in vain she asks the question,<br/>
Where her daring son is roaming,<br/>
Whether to the fir-tree mountain,<br/>
Whether to the distant heath-land,<br/>
Or upon the broad-sea’s ridges,<br/>
On the floods and rolling waters,<br/>
To the war’s contending armies,<br/>
To the heat and din of battle,<br/>
Steeped in blood of valiant heroes,<br/>
Evidence of fatal warfare.<br/>
Daily does the wife Kyllikki<br/>
Look about her vacant chamber,<br/>
In the home of Lemminkainen,<br/>
At the court of Kaukomieli;<br/>
Looks at evening, looks at morning,<br/>
Looks, perchance, upon his hair-brush,<br/>
Sees alas! the blood-drops oozing,<br/>
Oozing from the golden bristles,<br/>
And the blood-drops, scarlet-colored.<br/>
Then the beauteous wife, Kyllikki,<br/>
Spake these words in deeps of anguish:<br/>
“Dead or wounded is my husband,<br/>
Or at best is filled with trouble,<br/>
Lost perhaps in Northland forests,<br/>
In some glen unknown to heroes,<br/>
Since alas! the blood is flowing<br/>
From the brush of Lemminkainen,<br/>
Red drops oozing from the bristles.”<br/>
Thereupon the anxious mother<br/>
Looks upon the bleeding hair-brush<br/>
And begins this wail of anguish:<br/>
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated,<br/>
Woe is me, all joy departed!<br/>
For alas! my son and hero,<br/>
Valiant hero of the islands,<br/>
Son of trouble and misfortune!<br/>
Some sad fate has overtaken<br/>
My ill-fated Lemminkainen!<br/>
Blood is flowing from his hair-brush,<br/>
Oozing from its golden bristles,<br/>
And the drops are scarlet-colored.”<br/>
Quick her garment’s hem she clutches,<br/>
On her arm she throws her long-robes,<br/>
Fleetly flies upon her journey;<br/>
With her might she hastens northward,<br/>
Mountains tremble from her footsteps,<br/>
Valleys rise and heights are lowered,<br/>
Highlands soon become as lowlands,<br/>
All the hills and valleys levelled.<br/>
Soon she gains the Northland village,<br/>
Quickly asks about her hero,<br/>
These the words the mother utters:<br/>
“O thou hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Where hast thou my Lemminkainen?<br/>
Tell me of my son and hero!”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Gives this answer to the mother:<br/>
“Nothing know I of thy hero,<br/>
Of the hero of the islands;<br/>
Where thy son may be I know not,<br/>
Cannot lend the information;<br/>
Once I gave thy son a courser,<br/>
Hitched the racer to his snow-sledge,<br/>
This the last of Lemminkainen;<br/>
May perchance be drowned in Wuhne,<br/>
Frozen In the icy ocean,<br/>
Fallen prey to wolves in hunger,<br/>
In a bear’s den may have perished.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answers:<br/>
“Thou art only speaking falsehoods,<br/>
Northland wolves cannot devour us,<br/>
Nor the bears kill Kaukomieli;<br/>
He can slay the wolves of Pohya<br/>
With the fingers of his left hand;<br/>
Bears of Northland he would silence<br/>
With the magic of his singing.<br/>
“Hostess of Pohyola, tell me<br/>
Whither thou hast sent my hero;<br/>
I shall burst thy many garners,<br/>
Shall destroy the magic Sampo,<br/>
If thou dost not tell me truly<br/>
Where to find my Lemminkainen.”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“I have well thy hero treated,<br/>
Well my court has entertained him,<br/>
Gave him of my rarest viands,<br/>
Fed him at my well-filled tables,<br/>
Placed him in a boat of copper,<br/>
Thus to float adown the current,<br/>
This the last of Lemminkainen;<br/>
Cannot tell where he has wandered.<br/>
Whether in the foam of waters,<br/>
Whether in the boiling torrent,<br/>
Whether in the drowning whirlpool.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answers:<br/>
Thou again art speaking falsely;<br/>
Tell me now the truth I pray thee,<br/>
Make an end of thy deception,<br/>
Where is now my Lemminkainen,<br/>
Whither hast thou sent my hero,<br/>
Young and daring son of Kalew?<br/>
If a third time thou deceivest,<br/>
I will send thee plagues, unnumbered,<br/>
I will send thee fell destruction,<br/>
Certain death will overtake thee.”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“This the third time that I answer,<br/>
This the truth that I shall tell thee:<br/>
I have sent the Kalew-hero<br/>
To the Hisi-fields and forests,<br/>
There to hunt the moose of Lempo;<br/>
Sent him then to catch the fire-horse,<br/>
Catch the fire-expiring stallion,<br/>
On the distant plains of Juutas,<br/>
In the realm of cruel Hisi.<br/>
Then I sent him to the Death-stream,<br/>
In the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
With his bow and but one arrow,<br/>
There to shoot the swan as dowry<br/>
For my best and fairest daughter;<br/>
Have not heard about thy hero<br/>
Since he left for Tuonela;<br/>
May in misery have fallen,<br/>
May have perished in Manala;<br/>
Has not come to ask my daughter,<br/>
Has not come to woo the maiden,<br/>
Since he left to hunt the death-swan.”<br/>
Now the mother seeks her lost one,<br/>
For her son she weeps and trembles,<br/>
Like the wolf she bounds through fenlands,<br/>
Like the bear, through forest thickets,<br/>
Like the wild-boar, through the marshes,<br/>
Like the hare, along the sea-coast,<br/>
To the sea-point, like the hedgehog<br/>
Like the wild-duck swims the waters,<br/>
Casts the rubbish from her pathway,<br/>
Tramples down opposing brush-wood,<br/>
Stops at nothing in her journey<br/>
Seeks a long time for her hero,<br/>
Seeks, and seeks, and does not find him.<br/>
Now she asks the trees the question,<br/>
And the forest gives this answer:<br/>
“We have care enough already,<br/>
Cannot think about thy matters;<br/>
Cruel fates have we to battle,<br/>
Pitiful our own misfortunes!<br/>
We are felled and chopped in pieces,<br/>
Cut in blocks for hero-fancy,<br/>
We are burned to death as fuel,<br/>
No one cares how much we suffer.”<br/>
Now again the mother wanders,<br/>
Seeks again her long-lost hero,<br/>
Seeks, and seeks, and does not find him.<br/>
Paths arise and come to meet her,<br/>
And she questions thus the pathways:<br/>
“Paths of hope that God has fashioned,<br/>
Have ye seen my Lemminkainen,<br/>
Has my son and golden hero<br/>
Travelled through thy many kingdoms?”<br/>
Sad, the many pathways answer:<br/>
“We ourselves have cares sufficient,<br/>
Cannot watch thy son and hero,<br/>
Wretched are the lives of pathways,<br/>
Deep indeed our own misfortunes;<br/>
We are trodden by, the red-deer,<br/>
By the wolves, and bears, and roebucks,<br/>
Driven o’er by heavy cart-wheels,<br/>
By the feet of dogs are trodden,<br/>
Trodden under foot of heroes,<br/>
Foot-paths for contending armies.”<br/>
Seeks again the frantic mother,<br/>
Seeks her long-lost son and hero,<br/>
Seeks, and seeks, and does not find him;<br/>
Finds the Moon within her orbit,<br/>
Asks the Moon in pleading measures:<br/>
“Golden Moon, whom God has stationed<br/>
In the heavens, the Sun’s companion,<br/>
Hast thou seen my Kaukomieli,<br/>
Hast thou seen my silver apple,<br/>
Anywhere in thy dominions? “<br/>
Thus the golden Moon makes answer:<br/>
“I have trouble all-sufficient,<br/>
Cannot watch thy daring hero;<br/>
Long the journey I must travel,<br/>
Sad the fate to me befallen,<br/>
Pitiful mine own misfortunes,<br/>
All alone the nights to wander,<br/>
Shine alone without a respite,<br/>
In the winter ever watching,<br/>
In the summer sink and perish.”<br/>
Still the mother seeks, and wanders,<br/>
Seeks, and does not find her hero,<br/>
Sees the Sun in the horizon,<br/>
And the mother thus entreats him:<br/>
Silver Sun, whom God has fashioned,<br/>
Thou that giveth warmth and comfort,<br/>
Hast thou lately seen my hero,<br/>
Hast thou seen my Lemminkainen,<br/>
Wandering in thy dominions?”<br/>
Thus the Sun in kindness answers:<br/>
“Surely has thy hero perished,<br/>
To ingratitude a victim;<br/>
Lemminkainen died and vanished<br/>
In Tuoni’s fatal river,<br/>
In the waters of Manala,<br/>
In the sacred stream and whirlpool,<br/>
In the cataract and rapids,<br/>
Sank within the drowning current<br/>
To the realm of Tuonela,<br/>
To Manala’s lower regions.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother weeping,<br/>
Wailing in the deeps of anguish,<br/>
Mourns the fate of Kaukomieli,<br/>
Hastens to the Northland smithy,<br/>
To the forge of Ilmarinen,<br/>
These the words the mother utters:<br/>
“Ilmarinen, metal-artist,<br/>
Thou that long ago wert forging,<br/>
Forging earth a concave cover,<br/>
Yesterday wert forging wonders,<br/>
Forge thou now, immortal blacksmith,<br/>
Forge a rake with shaft of copper,<br/>
Forge the teeth of strongest metal,<br/>
Teeth in length a hundred fathoms,<br/>
And five hundred long the handle.”<br/>
Ilmarinen does as bidden,<br/>
Makes the rake in full perfection.<br/>
Lemminkainen’s anxious mother<br/>
Takes the magic rake and hastens<br/>
To the river of Tuoni,<br/>
Praying to the Sun as follows:<br/>
“Thou, O Sun, by God created,<br/>
Thou that shinest on thy Maker,<br/>
Shine for me in heat of magic,<br/>
Give me warmth, and strength, and courage,<br/>
Shine a third time full of power,<br/>
Lull to sleep the wicked people,<br/>
Still the people of Manala,<br/>
Quiet all Tuoni’s empire.”<br/>
Thereupon the sun of Ukko,<br/>
Dearest child of the Creator,<br/>
Flying through the groves of Northland,<br/>
Sitting on a curving birch-tree,<br/>
Shines a little while in ardor,<br/>
Shines again in greater fervor,<br/>
Shines a third time full of power,<br/>
Lulls to sleep the wicked people<br/>
In the Manala home and kingdom,<br/>
Still the heroes with their broadswords,<br/>
Makes the lancers halt and totter,<br/>
Stills the stoutest of the spearmen,<br/>
Quiets Tuoni’s ghastly empire.<br/>
Now the Sun retires in magic,<br/>
Hovers here and there a moment<br/>
Over Tuoni’s hapless sleepers,<br/>
Hastens upward to his station,<br/>
To his Jumala home and kingdom.<br/>
Lemminkainen’s faithful mother<br/>
Takes the rake of magic metals,<br/>
Rakes the Tuoni river bottoms,<br/>
Rakes the cataract and whirlpool,<br/>
Rakes the swift and boiling current<br/>
Of the sacred stream of death-land,<br/>
In the Manala home and kingdom.<br/>
Searching for her long-lost hero,<br/>
Rakes a long time, finding nothing;<br/>
Now she wades the river deeper,<br/>
To her belt in mud and water,<br/>
Deeper, deeper, rakes the death-stream,<br/>
Rakes the river’s deepest caverns,<br/>
Raking up and down the current,<br/>
Till at last she finds his tunic,<br/>
Heavy-hearted, finds his jacket;<br/>
Rakes again and rakes unceasing,<br/>
Finds the hero’s shoes and stockings,<br/>
Sorely troubled, finds these relies;<br/>
Now she wades the river deeper,<br/>
Rakes the Manala shoals and shallows,<br/>
Rakes the deeps at every angle;<br/>
As she draws the rake the third time<br/>
From the Tuoni shores and waters,<br/>
In the rake she finds the body<br/>
Of her long-lost Lemminkainen,<br/>
In the metal teeth entangled,<br/>
In the rake with copper handle.<br/>
Thus the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Thus the son of Kalevala,<br/>
Was recovered from the bottom<br/>
Of the Manala lake and river.<br/>
There were wanting many fragments,<br/>
Half the head, a hand, a fore-arm,<br/>
Many other smaller portions,<br/>
Life, above all else, was missing.<br/>
Then the mother, well reflecting,<br/>
Spake these words in bitter weeping:<br/>
“From these fragments, with my magic,<br/>
I will bring to life my hero.”<br/>
Hearing this, the raven answered,<br/>
Spake these measures to the mother:<br/>
“There is not in these a hero,<br/>
Thou canst not revive these fragments;<br/>
Eels have fed upon his body,<br/>
On his eyes have fed the whiting;<br/>
Cast the dead upon the waters,<br/>
On the streams of Tuonela,<br/>
Let him there become a walrus,<br/>
Or a seal, or whale, or porpoise.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother does not<br/>
Cast the dead upon the waters,<br/>
On the streams of Tuonela,<br/>
She again with hope and courage,<br/>
Rakes the river lengthwise, crosswise,<br/>
Through the Manala pools and caverns,<br/>
Rakes up half the head, a fore-arm,<br/>
Finds a hand and half the back-bone,<br/>
Many other smaller portions;<br/>
Shapes her son from all the fragments,<br/>
Shapes anew her Lemminkainen,<br/>
Flesh to flesh with skill she places,<br/>
Gives the bones their proper stations,<br/>
Binds one member to the other,<br/>
Joins the ends of severed vessels,<br/>
Counts the threads of all the venules,<br/>
Knits the parts in apposition;<br/>
Then this prayer the mother offers:<br/>
“Suonetar, thou slender virgin,<br/>
Goddess of the veins of heroes,<br/>
Skilful spinner of the vessels,<br/>
With thy slender, silver spindle,<br/>
With thy spinning-wheel of copper,<br/>
Set in frame of molten silver,<br/>
Come thou hither, thou art needed;<br/>
Bring the instruments for mending,<br/>
Firmly knit the veins together,<br/>
At the end join well the venules,<br/>
In the wounds that still are open,<br/>
In the members that are injured.<br/>
“Should this aid be inefficient;<br/>
There is living in the ether,<br/>
In a boat enriched with silver,<br/>
In a copper boat, a maiden,<br/>
That can bring to thee assistance.<br/>
Come, O maiden, from the ether,<br/>
Virgin from the belt of heaven,<br/>
Row throughout these veins, O maiden,<br/>
Row through all these lifeless members,<br/>
Through the channels of the long-bones,<br/>
Row through every form of tissue.<br/>
Set the vessels in their places,<br/>
Lay the heart in right position,<br/>
Make the pulses beat together,<br/>
Join the smallest of the veinlets,<br/>
And unite with skill the sinews.<br/>
Take thou now a slender needle,<br/>
Silken thread within its eyelet,<br/>
Ply the silver needle gently,<br/>
Sew with care the wounds together.<br/>
“Should this aid be inefficient,<br/>
Thou, O God, that knowest all things,<br/>
Come and give us thine assistance,<br/>
Harness thou thy fleetest racer<br/>
Call to aid thy strongest courser,<br/>
In thy scarlet sledge come swiftly,<br/>
Drive through all the bones and channels,<br/>
Drive throughout these lifeless tissues,<br/>
Drive thy courser through each vessel,<br/>
Bind the flesh and bones securely,<br/>
In the joints put finest silver,<br/>
Purest gold in all the fissures.<br/>
“Where the skin is broken open,<br/>
Where the veins are torn asunder,<br/>
Mend these injuries with magic;<br/>
Where the blood has left the body,<br/>
There make new blood flow abundant;<br/>
Where the bones are rudely broken,<br/>
Set the parts in full perfection;<br/>
Where the flesh is bruised and loosened,<br/>
Touch the wounds with magic balsam,<br/>
Do not leave a part imperfect;<br/>
Bone, and vein, and nerve, and sinew,<br/>
Heart, and brain, and gland, and vessel,<br/>
Heal as Thou alone canst heal them.”<br/>
These the means the mother uses,<br/>
Thus she joins the lifeless members,<br/>
Thus she heals the death-like tissues,<br/>
Thus restores her son and hero<br/>
To his former life and likeness;<br/>
All his veins are knit together,<br/>
All their ends are firmly fastened,<br/>
All the parts in apposition,<br/>
Life returns, but speech is wanting,<br/>
Deaf and dumb, and blind, and senseless.<br/>
Now the mother speaks as follows:<br/>
“Where may I procure the balsam,<br/>
Where the drops of magic honey,<br/>
To anoint my son and hero,<br/>
Thus to heal my Lemminkainen,<br/>
That again his month may open,<br/>
May again begin his singing,<br/>
Speak again in words of wonder,<br/>
Sing again his incantations?<br/>
“Tiny bee, thou honey-birdling,<br/>
Lord of all the forest flowers,<br/>
Fly away and gather honey,<br/>
Bring to me the forest-sweetness,<br/>
Found in Metsola’s rich gardens,<br/>
And in Tapio’s fragrant meadows,<br/>
From the petals of the flowers,<br/>
From the blooming herbs and grasses,<br/>
Thus to heal my hero’s anguish,<br/>
Thus to heal his wounds of evil.”<br/>
Thereupon the honey-birdling<br/>
Flies away on wings of swiftness,<br/>
Into Metsola’s rich gardens,<br/>
Into Tapio’s flowery meadows,<br/>
Gathers sweetness from the meadows,<br/>
With the tongue distills the honey<br/>
From the cups of seven flowers,<br/>
From the bloom of countless grasses;<br/>
Quick from Metsola returning,<br/>
Flying, humming darting onward,<br/>
With his winglets honey-laden,<br/>
With the store of sweetest odors,<br/>
To the mother brings the balsam.<br/>
Lemminkainen’s anxious mother<br/>
Takes the balm of magic virtues,<br/>
And anoints the injured hero,<br/>
Heals his wounds and stills his anguish;<br/>
But the balm is inefficient,<br/>
For her son is deaf and speechless.<br/>
Then again out-speaks the mother:<br/>
Lemminkainen’s Restoration.<br/>
“Little bee, my honey-birdling,<br/>
Fly away in one direction,<br/>
Fly across the seven oceans,<br/>
In the eighth, a magic island,<br/>
Where the honey is enchanted,<br/>
To the distant Turi-castles,<br/>
To the chambers of Palwoinen;<br/>
There the honey is effective,<br/>
There, the wonder-working balsam,<br/>
This may heal the wounded hero;<br/>
Bring me of this magic ointment,<br/>
That I may anoint his eyelids,<br/>
May restore his injured senses.”<br/>
Thereupon the honey-birdling<br/>
Flew away o’er seven oceans,<br/>
To the old enchanted island;<br/>
Flies one day, and then a second,<br/>
On the verdure does not settle,<br/>
Does not rest upon the flowers;<br/>
Flies a third day, fleetly onward,<br/>
Till a third day evening brings him<br/>
To the island in the ocean,<br/>
To the meadows rich in honey,<br/>
To the cataract and fire-flow,<br/>
To the sacred stream and whirlpool.<br/>
There the honey was preparing,<br/>
There the magic balm distilling<br/>
In the tiny earthen vessels,<br/>
In the burnished copper kettles,<br/>
Smaller than a maiden’s thimble,<br/>
Smaller than the tips of fingers.<br/>
Faithfully the busy insect<br/>
Gathers the enchanted honey<br/>
From the magic Turi-cuplets<br/>
In the chambers of Palwoinen.<br/>
Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
Ere the bee came loudly humming<br/>
Flying fleetly, honey-laden;<br/>
In his arms were seven vessels,<br/>
Seven, the vessels on each shoulder;<br/>
All were filled with honey-balsam,<br/>
With the balm of magic virtues.<br/>
Lemminkainen’s tireless mother<br/>
Quick anoints her speechless hero,<br/>
With the magic Turi-balsam,<br/>
With the balm of seven virtues;<br/>
Nine the times that she anoints him<br/>
With the honey of Palwoinen,<br/>
With the wonder-working balsam;<br/>
But the balm is inefficient,<br/>
For the hero still is speechless.<br/>
Then again out-speaks the mother:<br/>
“Honey-bee, thou ether birdling,<br/>
Fly a third time on thy journey,<br/>
Fly away to high Jumala,<br/>
Fly thou to the seventh heaven,<br/>
Honey there thou’lt find abundant,<br/>
Balsam of the highest virtue,<br/>
Only used by the Creator,<br/>
Only made from the breath of Ukko.<br/>
God anoints his faithful children,<br/>
With the honey of his wisdom,<br/>
When they feel the pangs of sorrow,<br/>
When they meet the powers of evil.<br/>
Dip thy winglets in this honey,<br/>
Steep thy plumage in His sweetness,<br/>
Hither bring the all-sufficient<br/>
Balsam of the great Creator;<br/>
This will still my hero’s anguish,<br/>
This will heal his wounded tissues,<br/>
This restore his long-lost vision,<br/>
Make the Northland hills re-echo<br/>
With the magic of his singing,<br/>
With his wonderful enchantment.”<br/>
Thus the honey-bee made answer:<br/>
“I can never fly to heaven,<br/>
To the seventh of the heavens,<br/>
To the distant home of Ukko,<br/>
With these wings of little virtue.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“Thou canst surely fly to heaven,<br/>
To the seventh of the heavens,<br/>
O’er the Moon, beneath the sunshine,<br/>
Through the dim and distant starlight.<br/>
On the first day, flying upward,<br/>
Thou wilt near the Moon in heaven,<br/>
Fan the brow of Kootamoinen;<br/>
On the second thou canst rest thee<br/>
On the shoulders of Otava;<br/>
On the third day, flying higher,<br/>
Rest upon the seven starlets,<br/>
On the heads of Hetewanè;<br/>
Short the journey that is left thee,<br/>
Inconsiderable the distance<br/>
To the home of mighty Ukko,<br/>
To the dwellings of the blessed.”<br/>
Thereupon the bee arising,<br/>
From the earth flies swiftly upward,<br/>
Hastens on with graceful motion,<br/>
By his tiny wings borne heavenward,<br/>
In the paths of golden moonbeams,<br/>
Touches on the Moon’s bright borders,<br/>
Fans the brow of Kootamoinen,<br/>
Rests upon Otava’s shoulders,<br/>
Hastens to the seven starlets.,<br/>
To the heads of Hetewanè,<br/>
Flies to the Creator’s castle,<br/>
To the home of generous Ukko,<br/>
Finds the remedy preparing,<br/>
Finds the balm of life distilling,<br/>
In the silver-tinted caldrons,<br/>
In the purest golden kettles;<br/>
On one side, heart-easing honey,<br/>
On a second, balm of joyance,<br/>
On the third, life-giving balsam.<br/>
Here the magic bee, selecting,<br/>
Culls the sweet, life-giving balsam,<br/>
Gathers too, heart-easing honey,<br/>
Heavy-laden hastens homeward.<br/>
Time had traveled little distance,<br/>
Ere the busy bee came humming<br/>
To the anxious mother waiting,<br/>
In his arms a hundred cuplets,<br/>
And a thousand other vessels,<br/>
Filled with honey, filled with balsam,<br/>
Filled with the balm of the Creator.<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother quickly<br/>
Takes them on her, tongue and tests them,<br/>
Finds a balsam all-sufficient.<br/>
Then the mother spake as follows:<br/>
“I have found the long-sought balsam,<br/>
Found the remedy of Ukko,<br/>
Where-with God anoints his people,<br/>
Gives them life, and faith, and wisdom,<br/>
Heals their wounds and stills their anguish,<br/>
Makes them strong against temptation,<br/>
Guards them from the evil-doers.”<br/>
Now the mother well anointing,<br/>
Heals her son, the magic singer,<br/>
Eyes, and ears, and tongue, and temples,<br/>
Breaks, and cuts, and seams, anointing,<br/>
Touching well the life-blood centres,<br/>
Speaks these words of magic import<br/>
To the sleeping Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Wake, arise from out thy slumber,<br/>
From the worst of low conditions,<br/>
From thy state of dire misfortune!”<br/>
Slowly wakes the son and hero,<br/>
Rises from the depths of slumber,<br/>
Speaks again in magic accents,<br/>
These the first words of the singer:<br/>
“Long, indeed, have I been sleeping,<br/>
Long unconscious of existence,<br/>
But my sleep was full of sweetness,<br/>
Sweet the sleep in Tuonela,<br/>
Knowing neither joy nor sorrow!”<br/>
This the answer of his mother:<br/>
“Longer still thou wouldst have slumbered,<br/>
Were it not for me, thy, mother;<br/>
Tell me now, my son beloved,<br/>
Tell me that I well may hear thee,<br/>
Who enticed thee to Manala,<br/>
To the river of Tuoni,<br/>
To the fatal stream and whirlpool?”<br/>
Then the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Gave this answer to his mother:<br/>
“Nasshut, the decrepit shepherd<br/>
Of the flocks of Sariola,<br/>
Blind, and halt, and poor, and wretched,<br/>
And to whom I did a favor;<br/>
From the slumber-land of envy<br/>
Nasshut sent me to Manala,<br/>
To the river of Tuoni;<br/>
Sent a serpent from the waters,<br/>
Sent an adder from the death-stream,<br/>
Through the heart of Lemminkainen;<br/>
Did not recognize the serpent,<br/>
Could not speak the serpent-language,<br/>
Did not know the sting of adders.”<br/>
Spake again the ancient mother:<br/>
“O thou son of little insight,<br/>
Senseless hero, fool-magician,<br/>
Thou didst boast betimes thy magic<br/>
To enchant the wise enchanters,<br/>
On the dismal shores of Lapland,<br/>
Thou didst think to banish heroes,<br/>
From the borders of Pohyola;<br/>
Didst not know the sting of serpents,<br/>
Didst not know the reed of waters,<br/>
Nor the magic word-protector!<br/>
Learn the origin of serpents,<br/>
Whence the poison of the adder.<br/>
“In the floods was born the serpent,<br/>
From the marrow of the gray-duck,<br/>
From the brain of ocean-swallows;<br/>
Suoyatar had made saliva,<br/>
Cast it on the waves of ocean,<br/>
Currents drove it outward, onward,<br/>
Softly shone the sun upon it,<br/>
By the winds ’twas gently cradled,<br/>
Gently nursed by winds and waters,<br/>
By the waves was driven shoreward,<br/>
Landed by the surging billows.<br/>
Thus the serpent, thing of evil,<br/>
Filling all the world with trouble,<br/>
Was created in the waters<br/>
Born from Suoyatar, its maker.”<br/>
Then the mother of the hero<br/>
Rocked her son to rest and comfort,<br/>
Rocked him to his former being,<br/>
To his former life and spirit,<br/>
Into greater magic powers;<br/>
Wiser, handsomer than ever<br/>
Grew the hero of the islands;<br/>
But his heart was full of trouble,<br/>
And his mother, ever watchful,<br/>
Asked the cause of his dejection.<br/>
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:<br/>
“This the cause of all my sorrow;<br/>
Far away my heart is roaming,<br/>
All my thoughts forever wander<br/>
To the Northland’s blooming virgins,<br/>
To the maids of braided tresses.<br/>
Northland’s ugly hostess, Louhi,<br/>
Will not give to me her daughter,<br/>
Fairest maiden of Pohyola,<br/>
Till I kill the swan of Mana,<br/>
With my bow and but one arrow,<br/>
In the river of Tuoni.<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answers,<br/>
In the sacred stream and whirlpool.<br/>
“Let the swan swim on in safety,<br/>
Give the water-bird his freedom,<br/>
In the river of Manala,<br/>
In the whirlpool of Tuoni;<br/>
Leave the maiden in the Northland.,<br/>
With her charms and fading beauty;<br/>
With thy fond and faithful mother,<br/>
Go at once to Kalevala,<br/>
To thy native fields and fallows.<br/>
Praise thy fortune, all sufficient,<br/>
Praise, above all else, thy Maker.<br/>
Ukko gave thee aid when needed,<br/>
Thou wert saved by thy Creator,<br/>
From thy long and hopeless slumber,<br/>
In the waters of Tuoni,<br/>
In the chambers of Manala.<br/>
I unaided could not save thee,<br/>
Could not give the least assistance;<br/>
God alone, omniscient Ukko,<br/>
First and last of the creators,<br/>
Can revive the dead and dying,<br/>
Can protect his worthy people<br/>
From the waters of Manala, .<br/>
From the fatal stream and whirlpool,<br/>
In the kingdom of Tuoni.”<br/>
Lemminkainen, filled with wisdom,<br/>
With his fond and faithful mother,<br/>
Hastened straightway on his journey<br/>
To his distant home and kindred,<br/>
To the Wainola fields and meadows,<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala.<br/>
* * * * *<br/>
Here I leave my Kaukomieli,<br/>
Leave my hero Lemminkainen,<br/>
Long I leave him from my singing,<br/>
Turn my song to other heroes,<br/>
Send it forth on other pathways,<br/>
Sing some other golden legend.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap16"/>RUNE XVI.<br/>
WAINAMOINEN’S BOAT-BUILDING.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
The eternal wisdom-singer,<br/>
For his boat was working lumber,<br/>
Working long upon his vessel,<br/>
On a fog-point jutting seaward,<br/>
On an island, forest-covered;<br/>
But the lumber failed the master,<br/>
Beams were wanting for his vessel,<br/>
Beams and scantling, ribs and flooring.<br/>
Who will find for him the lumber,<br/>
Who procure the timber needed<br/>
For the boat of Wainamoinen,<br/>
For the bottom of his vessel?<br/>
Pellerwoinen of the prairies,<br/>
Sampsa, slender-grown and ancient,<br/>
He will seek the needful timber,<br/>
He procure the beams of oak-wood<br/>
For the boat of Wainamoinen,<br/>
For the bottom of his vessel.<br/>
Soon he starts upon his journey<br/>
To the eastern fields and forests,<br/>
Hunts throughout the Northland mountain<br/>
To a second mountain wanders,<br/>
To a third he hastens, searching,<br/>
Golden axe upon his shoulder,<br/>
In his hand a copper hatchet.<br/>
Comes an aspen-tree to meet him<br/>
Of the height of seven fathoms.<br/>
Sampsa takes his axe of copper,<br/>
Starts to fell the stately aspen,<br/>
But the aspen quickly halting,<br/>
Speaks these words to Pellerwoinen:<br/>
“Tell me, hero, what thou wishest,<br/>
What the service thou art needing?”<br/>
Sampsa Pellerwoinen answers:<br/>
“This indeed, the needed service<br/>
That I ask of thee, O aspen:<br/>
Need thy lumber for a vessel,<br/>
For the boat of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Wisest of the wisdom-singers.”<br/>
Quick and wisely speaks the aspen,<br/>
Thus its hundred branches answer:<br/>
“All the boats that have been fashioned<br/>
From my wood have proved but failures;<br/>
Such a vessel floats a distance,<br/>
Then it sinks upon the bottom<br/>
Of the waters it should travel.<br/>
All my trunk is filled with hollows,<br/>
Three times in the summer seasons<br/>
Worms devour my stem and branches,<br/>
Feed upon my heart and tissues.”<br/>
Pellerwoinen leaves the aspen,<br/>
Hunts again through all the forest,<br/>
Wanders through the woods of Northland,<br/>
Where a pine-tree comes to meet him,<br/>
Of the height of fourteen fathoms.<br/>
With his axe he chops the pine-tree,<br/>
Strikes it with his axe of copper,<br/>
As he asks the pine this question:<br/>
“Will thy trunk give worthy timber<br/>
For the boat of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Wisest of the wisdom-singers?”<br/>
Loudly does the pine-tree answer:<br/>
“All the ships that have been fashioned<br/>
From my body are unworthy;<br/>
I am full of imperfections,<br/>
Cannot give thee needed timber<br/>
Wherewithal to build thy vessel;<br/>
Ravens live within ray branches,<br/>
Build their nests and hatch their younglings<br/>
Three times in my trunk in summer.”<br/>
Sampsa leaves the lofty pine-tree,<br/>
Wanders onward, onward, onward,<br/>
To the woods of gladsome summer,<br/>
Where an oak-tree comes to meet him,<br/>
In circumference, three fathoms,<br/>
And the oak he thus addresses:<br/>
“Ancient oak-tree, will thy body<br/>
Furnish wood to build a vessel,<br/>
Build a boat for Wainamoinen,<br/>
Master-boat for the magician,<br/>
Wisest of the wisdom-singers?”<br/>
Thus the oak replies to Sampsa:<br/>
“I for thee will gladly furnish<br/>
Wood to build the hero’s vessel;<br/>
I am tall, and sound, and hardy,<br/>
Have no flaws within my body;<br/>
Three times in the months of summer,<br/>
In the warmest of the seasons,<br/>
Does the sun dwell in my tree-top,<br/>
On my trunk the moonlight glimmers,<br/>
In my branches sings the cuckoo,<br/>
In my top her nestlings slumber.”<br/>
Now the ancient Pellerwoinen<br/>
Takes the hatchet from his shoulder,<br/>
Takes his axe with copper handle,<br/>
Chops the body of the oak-tree;<br/>
Well he knows the art of chopping.<br/>
Soon he fells the tree majestic,<br/>
Fells the mighty forest-monarch,<br/>
With his magic axe and power.<br/>
From the stems he lops the branches,<br/>
Splits the trunk in many pieces,<br/>
Fashions lumber for the bottom,<br/>
Countless boards, and ribs, and braces,<br/>
For the singer’s magic vessel,<br/>
For the boat of the magician.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and skilful,<br/>
The eternal wonder-worker,<br/>
Builds his vessel with enchantment,<br/>
Builds his boat by art of magic,<br/>
From the timber of the oak-tree,<br/>
From its posts, and planks, and flooring.<br/>
Sings a song, and joins the frame-work;<br/>
Sings a second, sets the siding;<br/>
Sings a third time, sets the row-locks;<br/>
Fashions oars, and ribs, and rudder,<br/>
Joins the sides and ribs together.<br/>
When the ribs were firmly fastened,<br/>
When the sides were tightly jointed,<br/>
Then alas! three words were wanting,<br/>
Lost the words of master-magic,<br/>
How to fasten in the ledges,<br/>
How the stern should be completed,<br/>
How complete the boat’s forecastle.<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Wise and wonderful enchanter,<br/>
Heavy-hearted spake as follows:<br/>
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!<br/>
Never will this magic vessel<br/>
Pass in safety o’er the water,<br/>
Never ride the rough sea-billows.”<br/>
Then he thought and long considered,<br/>
Where to find these words of magic,<br/>
Find the lost-words of the Master:<br/>
“From the brains of countless swallows,<br/>
From the heads of swans in dying,<br/>
From the plumage of the gray-duck?”<br/>
For these words the hero searches,<br/>
Kills of swans a goodly number,<br/>
Kills a flock of fattened gray-duck,<br/>
Kills of swallows countless numbers,<br/>
Cannot find the words of magic,<br/>
Not the lost-words of the Master.<br/>
Wainamoinen, wisdom-singer,<br/>
Still reflected and debated:<br/>
“I perchance may find the lost-words<br/>
On the tongue of summer-reindeer,<br/>
In the mouth of the white squirrel.”<br/>
Now again he hunts the lost-words,<br/>
Hastes to find the magic sayings,<br/>
Kills a countless host of reindeer,<br/>
Kills a rafterful of squirrels,<br/>
Finds of words a goodly number,<br/>
But they are of little value,<br/>
Cannot find the magic lost-word.<br/>
Long he thought and well considered:<br/>
“I can find of words a hundred<br/>
In the dwellings of Tuoni,<br/>
In the Manala fields and castles.”<br/>
Wainamoinen quickly journeys<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
There to find the ancient wisdom,<br/>
There to learn the secret doctrine;<br/>
Hastens on through fen and forest,<br/>
Over meads and over marshes,<br/>
Through the ever-rising woodlands,<br/>
Journeys one week through the brambles,<br/>
And a second through the hazels,<br/>
Through the junipers the third week,<br/>
When appear Tuoni’s islands,<br/>
And the Manala fields and castles.<br/>
Wainamoinen, brave and ancient,<br/>
Calls aloud in tones of thunder,<br/>
To the Tuonela deeps and dungeons,<br/>
And to Manala’s magic castle:<br/>
“Bring a boat, Tuoni’s daughter,<br/>
Bring a ferry-boat, O maiden,<br/>
That may bear me o’er this channel,<br/>
O’er this black and fatal river.”<br/>
Quick the daughter of Tuoni,<br/>
Magic maid of little stature,<br/>
Tiny virgin of Manala,<br/>
Tiny washer of the linen,<br/>
Tiny cleaner of the dresses,<br/>
At the river of Tuoni,<br/>
In Manala’s ancient castles,<br/>
Speaks these words to Wainamoinen,<br/>
Gives this answer to his calling:<br/>
“Straightway will I bring the row-boat,<br/>
When the reasons thou hast given<br/>
Why thou comest to Manala<br/>
In a hale and active body.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and artful.,<br/>
Gives this answer to the maiden:<br/>
“I was brought here by Tuoni,<br/>
Mana raised me from the coffin.”<br/>
Speaks the maiden of Manala:<br/>
“This a tale of wretched liars;<br/>
Had Tuoni brought thee hither,<br/>
Mana raised thee from the coffin,<br/>
Then Tuoni would be with thee,<br/>
Manalainen too would lead thee,<br/>
With Tuoni’s hat upon thee,<br/>
On thy hands, the gloves of Mana;<br/>
Tell the truth now, Wainamoinen,<br/>
What has brought thee to Manala?”<br/>
Wainamoinen, artful hero,<br/>
Gives this answer, still finessing:<br/>
“Iron brought me to Manala,<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoni.”<br/>
Speaks the virgin of the death-land,<br/>
Mana’s wise and tiny daughter:<br/>
“Well I know that this is falsehood,<br/>
Had the iron brought thee hither,<br/>
Brought thee to Tuoni’s kingdom,<br/>
Blood would trickle from thy vesture,<br/>
And the blood-drops, scarlet-colored.<br/>
Speak the truth now, Wainamoinen,<br/>
This the third time that I ask thee.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, little heeding,<br/>
Still finesses to the daughter:<br/>
“Water brought me to Manala,<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoui.”<br/>
This the tiny maiden’s answer:<br/>
“Well I know thou speakest falsely;<br/>
If the waters of Manala,<br/>
If the cataract and whirlpool,<br/>
Or the waves had brought thee hither,<br/>
From thy robes the drops would trickle,<br/>
Water drip from all thy raiment.<br/>
Tell the truth and I will serve thee,<br/>
What has brought thee to Manala?”<br/>
Then the wilful Wainamoinen<br/>
Told this falsehood to the maiden:<br/>
“Fire has brought me to Manala,<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoni.”<br/>
Spake again Tuoni’s daughter:<br/>
“Well I know the voice of falsehood.<br/>
If the fire had brought thee hither,<br/>
Brought thee to Tuoni’s empire,<br/>
Singed would be thy locks and eyebrows,<br/>
And thy beard be crisped and tangled.<br/>
O, thou foolish Wainamoinen,<br/>
If I row thee o’er the ferry,<br/>
Thou must speak the truth in answer,<br/>
This the last time I will ask thee;<br/>
Make an end of thy deception.<br/>
What has brought thee to Manala,<br/>
Still unharmed by pain or sickness,<br/>
Still untouched by Death’s dark angel<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“At the first I spake, not truly,<br/>
Now I give thee rightful answer:<br/>
I a boat with ancient wisdom,<br/>
Fashioned with my powers of magic,<br/>
Sang one day and then a second,<br/>
Sang the third day until evening,<br/>
When I broke the magic main-spring,<br/>
Broke my magic sledge in pieces,<br/>
Of my song the fleetest runners;<br/>
Then I come to Mana’s kingdom,<br/>
Came to borrow here a hatchet,<br/>
Thus to mend my sledge of magic,<br/>
Thus to join the parts together.<br/>
Send the boat now quickly over,<br/>
Send me, quick, Tuoni’s row-boat,<br/>
Help me cross this fatal river,<br/>
Cross the channel of Manala.”<br/>
Spake the daughter of Tuoni,<br/>
Mana’s maiden thus replying:<br/>
“Thou art sure a stupid fellow,<br/>
Foresight wanting, judgment lacking,<br/>
Having neither wit nor wisdom,<br/>
Coming here without a reason,<br/>
Coming to Tuoni’s empire;<br/>
Better far if thou shouldst journey<br/>
To thy distant home and kindred;<br/>
Man they that visit Mana,<br/>
Few return from Maria’s kingdom.”<br/>
Spake the good old Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Women old retreat from danger,<br/>
Not a man of any courage,<br/>
Not the weakest of the heroes.<br/>
Bring thy boat, Tuoni’s daughter,<br/>
Tiny maiden of Manala,<br/>
Come and row me o’er the ferry.”<br/>
Mana’s daughter does as bidden,<br/>
Brings her boat to Wainamoinen,<br/>
Quickly rows him through the channel,<br/>
O’er the black and fatal river,<br/>
To the kingdom of Manala,<br/>
Speaks these words to the magician:<br/>
“Woe to thee! O Wainamoinen!<br/>
Wonderful indeed, thy magic,<br/>
Since thou comest to Manala,<br/>
Comest neither dead nor dying.”<br/>
Tuonetar, the death-land hostess,<br/>
Ancient hostess of Tuoni,<br/>
Brings him pitchers filled with strong-beer,<br/>
Fills her massive golden goblets,<br/>
Speaks these measures to the stranger:<br/>
“Drink, thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Drink the beer of king Tuoni!”<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and cautious,<br/>
Carefully inspects the liquor,<br/>
Looks a long time in the pitchers,<br/>
Sees the spawning of the black-frogs,<br/>
Sees the young of poison-serpents,<br/>
Lizards, worms, and writhing adders,<br/>
Thus addresses Tuonetar:<br/>
“Have not come with this intention,<br/>
Have not come to drink thy poisons,<br/>
Drink the beer of Tuonela;<br/>
Those that drink Tuoni’s liquors,<br/>
Those that sip the cups of Mana,<br/>
Court the Devil and destruction,<br/>
End their lives in want and ruin.”<br/>
Tuonetar makes this answer:<br/>
“Ancient minstrel, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Tell me what has brought thee hither,<br/>
Brought thee to the, realm of Mana,<br/>
To the courts of Tuonela,<br/>
Ere Tuoni sent his angels<br/>
To thy home in Kalevala,<br/>
There to cut thy magic life-thread.”<br/>
Spake the singer, Wainamoinen:<br/>
“I was building me a vessel,<br/>
At my craft was working, singing,<br/>
Needed three words of the Master,<br/>
How to fasten in the ledges,<br/>
How the stern should be completed,<br/>
How complete the boat’s forecastle.<br/>
This the reason of my coming<br/>
To the empire of Tuoni,<br/>
To the castles of Manala:<br/>
Came to learn these magic sayings,<br/>
Learn the lost-words of the Master.”<br/>
Spake the hostess, Tuonetar:<br/>
“Mana never gives these sayings,<br/>
Canst not learn them from Tuoni,<br/>
Not the lost-words of the Master;<br/>
Thou shalt never leave this kingdom,<br/>
Never in thy magic life-time,<br/>
Never go to Kalevala,<br/>
To Wainola’s peaceful meadows.<br/>
To thy distant home and country.”<br/>
Quick the hostess, Tuonetar,<br/>
Waves her magic wand of slumber<br/>
O’er the head of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Puts to rest the wisdom-hero,<br/>
Lays him on the couch of Mana,<br/>
In the robes of living heroes,<br/>
Deep the sleep that settles o’er him.<br/>
In Manala lived a woman,<br/>
In the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
Evil witch and toothless wizard,<br/>
Spinner of the threads of iron,<br/>
Moulder of the bands of copper,<br/>
Weaver of a hundred fish-nets,<br/>
Of a thousand nets of copper,<br/>
Spinning in the days of summer,<br/>
Weaving in the winter evenings,<br/>
Seated on a rock in water.<br/>
In the kingdom of Tuoni<br/>
Lived a man, a wicked wizard,<br/>
Three the fingers of the hero,<br/>
Spinner he of iron meshes,<br/>
Maker too of nets of copper,<br/>
Countless were his nets of metal,<br/>
Moulded on a rock in water,<br/>
Through the many days of summer.<br/>
Mana’s son with crooked fingers,<br/>
Iron-pointed, copper fingers,<br/>
Pulls of nets, at least a thousand,<br/>
Through the river of Tuoni,<br/>
Sets them lengthwise, sets them crosswise,<br/>
In the fatal, darksome river,<br/>
That the sleeping Wainamomen,<br/>
Friend and brother of the waters,<br/>
May not leave the isle of Mana,<br/>
Never in the course of ages,<br/>
Never leave the death-land castles,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers<br/>
On the empire of Tuoni.<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and wary,<br/>
Rising from his couch of slumber,<br/>
Speaks these words as he is waking:<br/>
“Is there not some mischief brewing,<br/>
Am I not at last in danger,<br/>
In the chambers of Tuoni,<br/>
In the Manala home and household?”<br/>
Quick he changes his complexion,<br/>
Changes too his form and feature,<br/>
Slips into another body;<br/>
Like a serpent in a circle,<br/>
Rolls black-dyed upon the waters;<br/>
Like a snake among the willows,<br/>
Crawls he like a worm of magic,<br/>
Like an adder through the grasses,<br/>
Through the coal-black stream of death-land,<br/>
Through a thousand nets of copper<br/>
Interlaced with threads of iron,<br/>
From the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
From the castles of Manala.<br/>
Mana’s son, the wicked wizard,<br/>
With his iron-pointed fingers,<br/>
In the early morning hastens<br/>
To his thousand nets of copper,<br/>
Set within the Tuoni river,<br/>
Finds therein a countless number<br/>
Of the death-stream fish and serpents;<br/>
Does not find old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and wary,<br/>
Friend and fellow of the waters.<br/>
When the wonder-working hero<br/>
Had escaped from Tuonela,<br/>
Spake he thus in supplication:<br/>
“Gratitude to thee, O Ukko,<br/>
Do I bring for thy protection!<br/>
Never suffer other heroes,<br/>
Of thy heroes not the wisest,<br/>
To transgress the laws of nature;<br/>
Never let another singer,<br/>
While he lives within the body,<br/>
Cross the river of Tuoni,<br/>
As thou lovest thy creations.<br/>
Many heroes cross the channel,<br/>
Cross the fatal stream of Mana,<br/>
Few return to tell the story,<br/>
Few return from Tuonela,<br/>
From Manala’s courts and castles.”<br/>
Wainamoinen calls his people,<br/>
On the plains of Kalevala,<br/>
Speaks these words of ancient wisdom,<br/>
To the young men, to the maidens,<br/>
To the rising generation:<br/>
“Every child of Northland, listen:<br/>
If thou wishest joy eternal,<br/>
Never disobey thy parents,<br/>
Never evil treat the guiltless,<br/>
Never wrong the feeble-minded,<br/>
Never harm thy weakest fellow,<br/>
Never stain thy lips with falsehood,<br/>
Never cheat thy trusting neighbor,<br/>
Never injure thy companion,<br/>
Lest thou surely payest penance<br/>
In the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
In the prison of Manala;<br/>
There, the home of all the wicked,<br/>
There the couch of the unworthy,<br/>
There the chambers of the guilty.<br/>
Underneath Manala’s fire-rock<br/>
Are their ever-flaming couches,<br/>
For their pillows hissing serpents,<br/>
Vipers green their writhing covers,<br/>
For their drink the blood of adders,<br/>
For their food the pangs of hunger,<br/>
Pain and agony their solace;<br/>
If thou wishest joy eternal,<br/>
Shun the kingdom of Tuoui!”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap17"/>RUNE XVII.<br/>
WAINAMOINEN FINDS THE LOST-WORD.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Did not learn the words of magic<br/>
In Tuoni’s gloomy regions,<br/>
In the kingdom of Manala.<br/>
Thereupon he long debated,<br/>
Well considered, long reflected,<br/>
Where to find the magic sayings;<br/>
When a shepherd came to meet him,<br/>
Speaking thus to Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Thou canst find of words a hundred,<br/>
Find a thousand wisdom-sayings,<br/>
In the mouth of wise Wipunen,<br/>
In the body of the hero;<br/>
To the spot I know the foot-path,<br/>
To his tomb the magic highway,<br/>
Trodden by a host of heroes;<br/>
Long the distance thou must travel,<br/>
On the sharpened points of needles;<br/>
Then a long way thou must journey<br/>
On the edges of the broadswords;<br/>
Thirdly thou must travel farther<br/>
On the edges of the hatchets.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trustful,<br/>
Well considered all these journeys,<br/>
Travelled to the forge and smithy,<br/>
Thus addressed the metal-worker:<br/>
“Ilmarinen, worthy blacksmith,<br/>
Make a shoe for me of iron,<br/>
Forge me gloves of burnished copper,<br/>
Mold a staff of strongest metal,<br/>
Lay the steel upon the inside,<br/>
Forge within the might of magic;<br/>
I am going on a journey<br/>
To procure the magic sayings,<br/>
Find the lost-words of the Master,<br/>
From the mouth of the magician,<br/>
From the tongue of wise Wipunen.”<br/>
Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Long ago died wise Wipunen,<br/>
Disappeared these many ages,<br/>
Lays no more his snares of copper,<br/>
Sets no longer traps of iron,<br/>
Cannot learn from him the wisdom,<br/>
Cannot find in him the lost-words.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and hopeful,<br/>
Little heeding, not discouraged,<br/>
In his metal shoes and armor,<br/>
Hastens forward on his journey,<br/>
Runs the first day fleetly onward,<br/>
On the sharpened points of needles;<br/>
‘Wearily he strides the second,<br/>
On the edges of the broadswords<br/>
Swings himself the third day forward,<br/>
On the edges of the hatchets.<br/>
Wise Wipunen, wisdom-singer,<br/>
Ancient bard, and great magician,<br/>
With his magic songs lay yonder,<br/>
Stretched beside him, lay his sayings,<br/>
On his shoulder grew the aspen,<br/>
On each temple grew the birch-tree,<br/>
On his mighty chin the alder,<br/>
From his beard grew willow-bushes,<br/>
From his mouth the dark green fir-tree,<br/>
And the oak-tree from his forehead.<br/>
Wainamoinen, coming closer,<br/>
Draws his sword, lays bare his hatchet<br/>
From his magic leathern scabbard,<br/>
Fells the aspen from his shoulder,<br/>
Fells the birch-tree from his temples,<br/>
From his chin he fells the alder,<br/>
From his beard, the branching willows,<br/>
From his mouth the dark-green fir-tree,<br/>
Fells the oak-tree from his forehead.<br/>
Now he thrusts his staff of iron<br/>
Through the mouth of wise Wipunen,<br/>
Pries his mighty jaws asunder,<br/>
Speaks these words of master-magic:<br/>
“Rise, thou master of magicians,<br/>
From the sleep of Tuonela,<br/>
From thine everlasting slumber!”<br/>
Wise Wipunen, ancient singer,<br/>
Quickly wakens from his sleeping,<br/>
Keenly feels the pangs of torture,<br/>
From the cruel staff of iron;<br/>
Bites with mighty force the metal,<br/>
Bites in twain the softer iron,<br/>
Cannot bite the steel asunder,<br/>
Opens wide his mouth in anguish.<br/>
Wainamoinen of Wainola,<br/>
In his iron-shoes and armor,<br/>
Careless walking, headlong stumbles<br/>
In the spacious mouth and fauces<br/>
Of the magic bard, Wipunen.<br/>
Wise Wipunen, full of song-charms,<br/>
Opens wide his mouth and swallows<br/>
Wainamoinen and his magic,<br/>
Shoes, and staff, and iron armor.<br/>
Then outspeaks the wise Wipunen:<br/>
“Many things before I’ve eaten,<br/>
Dined on goat, and sheep, and reindeer,<br/>
Bear, and ox, and wolf, and wild-boar,<br/>
Never in my recollection,<br/>
Have I tasted sweeter morsels!”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Now I see the evil symbols,<br/>
See misfortune hanging o’er me,<br/>
In the darksome Hisi-hurdles,<br/>
In the catacombs of Kalma.”<br/>
Wainamoinen long considered<br/>
How to live and how to prosper,<br/>
How to conquer this condition.<br/>
In his belt he wore a poniard,<br/>
With a handle hewn from birch-wood,<br/>
From the handle builds a vessel,<br/>
Builds a boat through magic science;<br/>
In this vessel rows he swiftly<br/>
Through the entrails of the hero,<br/>
Rows through every gland and vessel<br/>
Of the wisest of magicians.<br/>
Old Wipunen, master-singer,<br/>
Barely feels the hero’s presence,<br/>
Gives no heed to Wainamoinen.<br/>
Then the artist of Wainola<br/>
Straightway sets himself to forging,<br/>
Sets at work to hammer metals;<br/>
Makes a smithy from his armor,<br/>
Of his sleeves he makes the bellows,<br/>
Makes the air-valve from his fur-coat,<br/>
From his stockings, makes the muzzle,<br/>
Uses knees instead of anvil,<br/>
Makes a hammer of his fore-arm;<br/>
Like the storm-wind roars the bellows,<br/>
Like the thunder rings the anvil;<br/>
Forges one day, then a second,<br/>
Forges till the third day closes,<br/>
In the body of Wipunen,<br/>
In the sorcerer’s abdomen.<br/>
Old Wipunen, full of magic,<br/>
Speaks these words in wonder, guessing:<br/>
“Who art thou of ancient heroes,<br/>
Who of all the host of heroes?<br/>
Many heroes I have eaten,<br/>
And of men a countless number,<br/>
Have not eaten such as thou art;<br/>
Smoke arises from my nostrils,<br/>
From my mouth the fire is streaming,<br/>
In my throat are iron-clinkers.<br/>
“Go, thou monster, hence to wander,<br/>
Flee this place, thou plague of Northland,<br/>
Ere I go to seek thy mother,<br/>
Tell the ancient dame thy mischief;<br/>
She shall bear thine evil conduct,<br/>
Great the burden she shall carry;<br/>
Great a mother’s pain and anguish,<br/>
When her child runs wild and lawless;<br/>
Cannot comprehend the meaning,<br/>
Nor this mystery unravel,<br/>
Why thou camest here, O monster,<br/>
Camest here to give me torture.<br/>
Art thou Hisi sent from heaven,<br/>
Some calamity from Ukko?<br/>
Art, perchance, some new creation,<br/>
Ordered here to do me evil?<br/>
If thou art some evil genius,<br/>
Some calamity from Ukko,<br/>
Sent to me by my Creator,<br/>
Then am I resigned to suffer<br/>
God does not forsake the worthy,<br/>
Does not ruin those that trust him,<br/>
Never are the good forsaken.<br/>
If by man thou wert created,<br/>
If some hero sent thee hither,<br/>
I shall learn thy race of evil,<br/>
Shall destroy thy wicked tribe-folk.<br/>
“Thence arose the violation,<br/>
Thence arose the first destruction,<br/>
Thence came all the evil-doings:<br/>
From the neighborhood of wizards,<br/>
From the homes of the magicians,<br/>
From the eaves of vicious spirits,<br/>
From the haunts of fortune-tellers,<br/>
From the cabins of the witches,<br/>
From the castles of Tuoni,<br/>
From the bottom of Manala,<br/>
From the ground with envy swollen,<br/>
From Ingratitude’s dominions,<br/>
From the rocky shoals and quicksands,<br/>
From the marshes filled with danger,<br/>
From the cataract’s commotion,<br/>
From the bear-caves in the mountains,<br/>
From the wolves within the thickets,<br/>
From the roarings of the pine-tree,<br/>
From the burrows of the fox-dog,<br/>
From the woodlands of the reindeer,<br/>
From the eaves and Hisi-hurdles,<br/>
From the battles of the giants,<br/>
From uncultivated pastures,<br/>
From the billows of the oceans,<br/>
From the streams of boiling waters,<br/>
From the waterfalls of Rutya,<br/>
From the limits of the storm-clouds,<br/>
From the pathways of the thunders,<br/>
From the flashings of the lightnings,<br/>
From the distant plains of Pohya,<br/>
From the fatal stream and whirlpool,<br/>
From the birthplace of Tuoni.<br/>
“Art thou coming from these places?<br/>
Hast thou, evil, hastened hither,<br/>
To the heart of sinless hero,<br/>
To devour my guiltless body,<br/>
To destroy this wisdom-singer?<br/>
Get thee hence, thou dog of Lempo,<br/>
Leave, thou monster from Manala,<br/>
Flee from mine immortal body,<br/>
Leave my liver, thing of evil,<br/>
In my body cease thy forging,<br/>
Cease this torture of my vitals,<br/>
Let me rest in peace and slumber.<br/>
“Should I want in means efficient,<br/>
Should I lack the magic power<br/>
To outroot thine evil genius,<br/>
I shall call a better hero,<br/>
Call upon a higher power,<br/>
To remove this dire misfortune,<br/>
To annihilate this monster.<br/>
I shall call the will of woman,<br/>
From the fields, the old-time heroes?<br/>
Mounted heroes from the sand-hills,<br/>
Thus to rescue me from danger,<br/>
From these pains and ceaseless tortures.<br/>
“If this force prove inefficient,<br/>
Should not drive thee from my body,<br/>
Come, thou forest, with thy heroes,<br/>
Come, ye junipers and pine-trees,<br/>
With your messengers of power,<br/>
Come, ye mountains, with your wood-nymphs,<br/>
Come, ye lakes, with all your mermaids,<br/>
Come, ye hundred ocean-spearmen,<br/>
Come, torment this son of Hisi,<br/>
Come and kill this evil monster.<br/>
“If this call is inefficient,<br/>
Does not drive thee from my vitals,<br/>
Rise, thou ancient water-mother,<br/>
With thy blue-cap from the ocean,<br/>
From the seas, the lakes, the rivers,<br/>
Bring protection to thy hero,<br/>
Comfort bring and full assistance,<br/>
That I guiltless may not suffer,<br/>
May not perish prematurely.<br/>
“Shouldst thou brave this invocation,<br/>
Kapè, daughter of Creation,<br/>
Come, thou beauteous, golden maiden,<br/>
Oldest of the race of women,<br/>
Come and witness my misfortunes,<br/>
Come and turn away this evil,<br/>
Come, remove this biting torment,<br/>
Take away this plague of Piru.<br/>
“If this call be disregarded,<br/>
If thou wilt not leave me guiltless,<br/>
Ukko, on the arch of heaven,<br/>
In the thunder-cloud dominions,<br/>
Come thou quickly, thou art needed,<br/>
Come, protect thy tortured hero,<br/>
Drive away this magic demon,<br/>
Banish ever his enchantment,<br/>
With his sword and flaming furnace,<br/>
With his fire-enkindling bellows.<br/>
“Go, thou demon, hence to wander,<br/>
Flee, thou plague of Northland heroes;<br/>
Never come again for shelter,<br/>
Nevermore build thou thy dwelling<br/>
In the body of Wipunen;<br/>
Take at once thy habitation<br/>
To the regions of thy kindred,<br/>
To thy distant fields and firesides;<br/>
When thy journey thou hast ended,<br/>
Gained the borders of thy country,<br/>
Gained the meads of thy Creator,<br/>
Give a signal of thy coming,<br/>
Rumble like the peals of thunder,<br/>
Glisten like the gleam of lightning,<br/>
Knock upon the outer portals,<br/>
Enter through the open windows,<br/>
Glide about the many chambers,<br/>
Seize the host and seize the hostess,<br/>
Knock their evil beads together,<br/>
Wring their necks and hurl their bodies<br/>
To the black-dogs of the forest.<br/>
“Should this prove of little value,<br/>
Hover like the bird of battle,<br/>
O’er the dwellings of the master,<br/>
Scare the horses from the mangers,<br/>
From the troughs affright the cattle,<br/>
Twist their tails, and horns, and forelocks,<br/>
Hurl their carcasses to Lempo.<br/>
“If some scourge the winds have sent me,<br/>
Sent me on the air of spring-tide,<br/>
Brought me by the frosts of winter,<br/>
Quickly journey whence thou camest,<br/>
On the air-path of the heavens,<br/>
Perching not upon some aspen,<br/>
Resting not upon the birch-tree;<br/>
Fly away to copper mountains,<br/>
That the copper-winds may nurse thee,<br/>
Waves of ether, thy protection.<br/>
“Didst those come from high Jumala,<br/>
From the hems of ragged snow-clouds,<br/>
Quick ascend beyond the cloud-space,<br/>
Quickly journey whence thou camest,<br/>
To the snow-clouds, crystal-sprinkled,<br/>
To the twinkling stars of heaven<br/>
There thy fire may burn forever,<br/>
There may flash thy forked lightnings,<br/>
In the Sun’s undying furnace.<br/>
“Wert thou sent here by the spring-floods,<br/>
Driven here by river-torrents?<br/>
Quickly journey whence thou camest,<br/>
Quickly hasten to the waters,<br/>
To the borders of the rivers,<br/>
To the ancient water-mountain,<br/>
That the floods again may rock thee,<br/>
And thy water-mother nurse thee.<br/>
“Didst thou come from Kalma’s kingdom,<br/>
From the castles of the death-land?<br/>
Haste thou back to thine own country,<br/>
To the Kalma-halls and castles,<br/>
To the fields with envy swollen,<br/>
Where contending armies perish.<br/>
“Art thou from the Hisi-woodlands,<br/>
From ravines in Lempo’s forest,<br/>
From the thickets of the pine-wood,<br/>
From the dwellings of the fir-glen?<br/>
Quick retrace thine evil footsteps<br/>
To the dwellings of thy master,<br/>
To the thickets of thy kindred;<br/>
There thou mayest dwell at pleasure,<br/>
Till thy house decays about thee,<br/>
Till thy walls shall mould and crumble.<br/>
Evil genius, thee I banish,<br/>
Got thee hence, thou horrid monster,<br/>
To the caverns of the white-bear,<br/>
To the deep abysm of serpents,<br/>
To the vales, and swamps, and fenlands,<br/>
To the ever-silent waters,<br/>
To the hot-springs of the mountains,<br/>
To the dead-seas of the Northland,<br/>
To the lifeless lakes and rivers,<br/>
To the sacred stream and whirlpool.<br/>
“Shouldst thou find no place of resting,<br/>
I will banish thee still farther,<br/>
To the Northland’s distant borders,<br/>
To the broad expanse of Lapland,<br/>
To the ever-lifeless deserts,<br/>
To the unproductive prairies,<br/>
Sunless, moonless, starless, lifeless,<br/>
In the dark abyss of Northland;<br/>
This for thee, a place befitting,<br/>
Pitch thy tents and feast forever<br/>
On the dead plains of Pohyola.<br/>
“Shouldst thou find no means of living,<br/>
I will banish thee still farther,<br/>
To the cataract of Rutya,<br/>
To the fire-emitting whirlpool,<br/>
Where the firs are ever falling,<br/>
To the windfalls of the forest;<br/>
Swim hereafter in the waters<br/>
Of the fire-emitting whirlpool,<br/>
Whirl thou ever in the current<br/>
Of the cataract’s commotion,<br/>
In its foam and boiling waters.<br/>
Should this place be unbefitting,<br/>
I will drive thee farther onward,<br/>
To Tuoni’s coal-black river,<br/>
To the endless stream of Mana,<br/>
Where thou shalt forever linger;<br/>
Thou canst never leave Manala,<br/>
Should I not thy head deliver,<br/>
Should I never pay thy ransom;<br/>
Thou canst never safely journey<br/>
Through nine brother-rams abutting,<br/>
Through nine brother-bulls opposing<br/>
Through nine brother-stallions thwarting,<br/>
Thou canst not re-cross Death-river<br/>
Thickly set with iron netting,<br/>
Interlaced with threads of copper.<br/>
“Shouldst thou ask for steeds for saddle,<br/>
Shouldst thou need a fleet-foot courser,<br/>
I will give thee worthy racers,<br/>
I will give thee saddle-horses;<br/>
Evil Hisi has a charger,<br/>
Crimson mane, and tail, and foretop,<br/>
Fire emitting from his nostrils,<br/>
As he prances through his pastures;<br/>
Hoofs are made of strongest iron,<br/>
Legs are made of steel and copper,<br/>
Quickly scales the highest mountains,<br/>
Darts like lightning through the valleys,<br/>
When a skilful master rides him.<br/>
“Should this steed be insufficient,<br/>
I will give thee Lempo’s snow-shoes,<br/>
Give thee Hisi’s shoes of elm-wood,<br/>
Give to thee the staff of Piru,<br/>
That with these thou mayest journey<br/>
Into Hisi’s courts and castles,<br/>
To the woods and fields of Juutas;<br/>
If the rocks should rise before thee,<br/>
Dash the flinty rocks in pieces,<br/>
Hurl the fragments to the heavens;<br/>
If the branches cross thy pathway,<br/>
Make them turn aside in greeting;<br/>
If some mighty hero hail thee,<br/>
Hurl him headlong to the woodlands.<br/>
“Hasten hence, thou thing of evil,<br/>
Heinous monster, leave my body,<br/>
Ere the breaking of the morning<br/>
Ere the Sun awakes from slumber,<br/>
Ere the sinning of the cuckoo;<br/>
Haste away, thou plague of Northland,<br/>
Haste along the track of moonbeams,<br/>
Wander hence, forever wander,<br/>
To the darksome fields or Pohya.<br/>
“If at once thou dost not leave me,<br/>
I will send the eagle’s talons,<br/>
Send to thee the beaks of vultures,<br/>
To devour thine evil body,<br/>
Hurl thy skeleton to Hisi.<br/>
Much more quickly cruel Lempo<br/>
Left my vitals when commanded,<br/>
When I called the aid of Ukko,<br/>
Called the help of my Creator.<br/>
Flee, thou motherless offendant,<br/>
Flee, thou fiend of Sariola,<br/>
Flee, thou hound without a master,<br/>
Ere the morning sun arises,<br/>
Ere the Moon withdraws to slumber!”<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient hero,<br/>
Speaks at last to old Wipunen:<br/>
“Satisfied am I to linger<br/>
In these old and spacious caverns,<br/>
Pleasant here my home and dwelling;<br/>
For my meat I have thy tissues,<br/>
Have thy heart, and spleen, and liver,<br/>
For my drink the blood of ages,<br/>
Goodly home for Wainamoinen.<br/>
“I shall set my forge and bellows<br/>
Deeper, deeper in thy vitals;<br/>
I shall swing my heavy hammer,<br/>
Swing it with a greater power<br/>
On thy heart, and lungs, and liver;<br/>
I shall never, never leave thee<br/>
Till I learn thine incantations,<br/>
Learn thy many wisdom-sayings,<br/>
Learn the lost-words of the Master;<br/>
Never must these words be bidden,<br/>
Earth must never lose this wisdom,<br/>
Though the wisdom-singers perish.”<br/>
Old Wipunen, wise magician,<br/>
Ancient prophet, filled with power,<br/>
Opens full his store of knowledge,<br/>
Lifts the covers from his cases,<br/>
Filled with old-time incantations,<br/>
Filled with songs of times primeval,<br/>
Filled with ancient wit and wisdom;<br/>
Sings the very oldest folk-songs,<br/>
Sings the origin of witchcraft,<br/>
Sings of Earth and its beginning<br/>
Sings the first of all creations,<br/>
Sings the source of good and evil<br/>
Sung alas! by youth no longer,<br/>
Only sung in part by heroes<br/>
In these days of sin and sorrow.<br/>
Evil days our land befallen.<br/>
Sings the orders of enchantment.<br/>
How, upon the will of Ukko,<br/>
By command of the Creator,<br/>
How the air was first divided,<br/>
How the water came from ether,<br/>
How the earth arose from water,<br/>
How from earth came vegetation,<br/>
Fish, and fowl, and man, and hero.<br/>
Sings again the wise Wipunen,<br/>
How the Moon was first created,<br/>
How the Sun was set in heaven,<br/>
Whence the colors of the rainbow,<br/>
Whence the ether’s crystal pillars,<br/>
How the skies with stars were sprinkled.<br/>
Then again sings wise Wipunen,<br/>
Sings in miracles of concord,<br/>
Sings in magic tones of wisdom,<br/>
Never was there heard such singing;<br/>
Songs he sings in countless numbers,<br/>
Swift his notes as tongues of serpents,<br/>
All the distant hills re-echo;<br/>
Sings one day, and then a second,<br/>
Sings a third from dawn till evening,<br/>
Sings from evening till the morning;<br/>
Listen all the stars of heaven,<br/>
And the Moon stands still and listens<br/>
Fall the waves upon the deep-sea,<br/>
In the bay the tides cease rising,<br/>
Stop the rivers in their courses,<br/>
Stops the waterfall of Rutya,<br/>
Even Jordan ceases flowing,<br/>
And the Wuoksen stops and listens.<br/>
When the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Well had learned the magic sayings,<br/>
Learned the ancient songs and legends,<br/>
Learned the words of ancient wisdom,<br/>
Learned the lost-words of the Master,<br/>
Well had learned the secret doctrine,<br/>
He prepared to leave the body<br/>
Of the wisdom-bard, Wipunen,<br/>
Leave the bosom of the master,<br/>
Leave the wonderful enchanter.<br/>
Spake the hero, Wainamoinen:<br/>
“O, thou Antero Wipunen,<br/>
Open wide thy mouth and fauces,<br/>
I have found the magic lost-words,<br/>
I will leave thee now forever,<br/>
Leave thee and thy wondrous singing,<br/>
Will return to Kalevala,<br/>
To Wainola’s fields and firesides.”<br/>
Thus Wipunen spake in answer:<br/>
“Many are the things I’ve eaten,<br/>
Eaten bear, and elk, and reindeer,<br/>
Eaten ox, and wolf, and wild-boar,<br/>
Eaten man, and eaten hero,<br/>
Never, never have I eaten<br/>
Such a thing as Wainamoinen;<br/>
Thou hast found what thou desirest,<br/>
Found the three words of the Master;<br/>
Go in peace, and ne’er returning,<br/>
Take my blessing on thy going.”<br/>
Thereupon the bard Wipunen<br/>
Opens wide his mouth, and wider;<br/>
And the good, old Wainamoinen<br/>
Straightway leaves the wise enchanter,<br/>
Leaves Wipunen’s great abdomen;<br/>
From the mouth he glides and journeys<br/>
O’er the hills and vales of Northland,<br/>
Swift as red-deer or the forest,<br/>
Swift as yellow-breasted marten,<br/>
To the firesides of Wainola,<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala.<br/>
Straightway hastes he to the smithy<br/>
Of his brother, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Thus the iron-artist greets him:<br/>
Hast thou found the long-lost wisdom,<br/>
Hast thou heard the secret doctrine,<br/>
Hast thou learned the master magic,<br/>
How to fasten in the ledges,<br/>
How the stern should be completed,<br/>
How complete the ship’s forecastle?<br/>
Wainamoinen thus made answer:<br/>
“I have learned of words a hundred,<br/>
Learned a thousand incantations,<br/>
Hidden deep for many ages,<br/>
Learned the words of ancient wisdom,<br/>
Found the keys of secret doctrine,<br/>
Found the lost-words of the Master.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, magic-builder,<br/>
Straightway journeys to his vessel,<br/>
To the spot of magic labor,<br/>
Quickly fastens in the ledges,<br/>
Firmly binds the stern together<br/>
And completes the boat’s forecastle.<br/>
Thus the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Built the boat with magic only,<br/>
And with magic launched his vessel,<br/>
Using not the hand to touch it,<br/>
Using not the foot to move it,<br/>
Using not the knee to turn it,<br/>
Using nothing to propel it.<br/>
Thus the third task was completed,<br/>
For the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Dowry for the Maid of Beauty<br/>
Sitting on the arch of heaven,<br/>
On the bow of many colors.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap18"/>RUNE XVIII.<br/>
THE RIVAL SUITORS</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Long considered, long debated,<br/>
How to woo and win the daughter<br/>
Of the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
How to lead the Bride of Beauty,<br/>
Fairy maiden of the rainbow,<br/>
To the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
From the dismal Sariola.<br/>
Now he decks his magic vessel,<br/>
Paints the boat in blue and scarlet,<br/>
Trims in gold the ship’s forecastle,<br/>
Decks the prow in molten silver;<br/>
Sings his magic ship down gliding,<br/>
On the cylinders of fir-tree:<br/>
Now erects the masts of pine-wood,<br/>
On each mast the sails of linen,<br/>
Sails of blue, and white, and scarlet,<br/>
Woven into finest fabric.<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
Steps aboard his wondrous vessel,<br/>
Steers the bark across the waters,<br/>
On the blue back of the broad-sea,<br/>
Speaks these words in sailing northward,<br/>
Sailing to the dark Pohyola:<br/>
“Come aboard my ship, O Ukko,<br/>
Come with me, thou God of mercy,<br/>
To protect thine ancient hero,<br/>
To support thy trusting servant,<br/>
On the breasts of raging billows,<br/>
On the far out-stretching waters.<br/>
“Rock, O winds, this wondrous vessel,<br/>
Causing not a single ripple;<br/>
Rolling waves, bear ye me northward,<br/>
That the oar may not be needed<br/>
In my journey to Pohyola,<br/>
O’er this mighty waste of waters.”<br/>
Ilmarinen’s beauteous sister,<br/>
Fair and goodly maid, Annikki,<br/>
Of the Night and Dawn, the daughter,<br/>
Who awakes each morning early,<br/>
Rises long before the daylight,<br/>
Stood one morning on the sea-shore,<br/>
Washing in the foam her dresses,<br/>
Rinsing out her silken ribbons,<br/>
On the bridge of scarlet color,<br/>
On the border of the highway,<br/>
On a headland jutting seaward,<br/>
On the forest-covered island.<br/>
Here Annikki, looking round her,<br/>
Looking through the fog and ether,<br/>
Looking through the clouds of heaven,<br/>
Gazing far out on the blue-sea,<br/>
Sees the morning sun arising,<br/>
Glimmering along the billows,<br/>
Looks with eyes of distant vision<br/>
Toward the sunrise on the waters,<br/>
Toward the winding streams of Suomi,<br/>
Where the Wina-waves were flowing.<br/>
There she sees, on the horizon,<br/>
Something darkle in the sunlight,<br/>
Something blue upon the billows,<br/>
Speaks these words in wonder guessing:<br/>
What is this upon the surges,<br/>
What this blue upon the waters,<br/>
What this darkling in the sunlight?<br/>
’Tis perhaps a flock of wild-geese,<br/>
Or perchance the blue-duck flying;<br/>
Then upon thy wings arising,<br/>
Fly away to highest heaven.<br/>
“Art thou then a shoal of sea-trout,<br/>
Or perchance a school of salmon?<br/>
Dive then to the deep sea-bottom,<br/>
In the waters swim and frolic.<br/>
“Art thou then a cliff of granite,<br/>
Or perchance a mighty oak-tree,<br/>
Floating on the rough sea-billows?<br/>
May the floods then wash and beat thee<br/>
Break thee to a thousand fragments.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, sailing northward,<br/>
Steers his wondrous ship of magic<br/>
Toward the headland jutting seaward,<br/>
Toward the island forest-covered.<br/>
Now Annikki, goodly maiden,<br/>
Sees it is the magic vessel<br/>
Of a wonderful enchanter,<br/>
Of a mighty bard and hero,<br/>
And she asks this simple question:<br/>
“Art thou then my father’s vessel,<br/>
Or my brother’s ship of magic?<br/>
Haste away then to thy harbor,<br/>
To thy refuge in Wainola.<br/>
Hast thou come a goodly distance?<br/>
Sail then farther on thy journey,<br/>
Point thy prow to other waters.”<br/>
It was not her father’s vessel,<br/>
Not a sail-boat from the distance,<br/>
’Twas the ship of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Bark of the eternal singer;<br/>
Sails within a hailing distance,<br/>
Swims still nearer o’er the waters,<br/>
Brings one word and takes another,<br/>
Brings a third of magic import.<br/>
Speaks the goodly maid, Annikki,<br/>
Of the Night and Dawn, the daughter,<br/>
To the sailor of the vessel:<br/>
“Whither sailest, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Whither bound, thou friend of waters,<br/>
Pride and joy of Kalevala?”<br/>
From the vessel Wainamomen<br/>
Gives this answer to the maiden:<br/>
“I have come to catch some sea-trout,<br/>
Catch the young and toothsome whiting,<br/>
Hiding in tbese-reeds and rushes.”<br/>
This the answer of Annikki:<br/>
“Do not speak to me in falsehood,<br/>
Know I well the times of fishing;<br/>
Long ago my honored father<br/>
Was a fisherman in Northland,<br/>
Came to catch the trout and whiting,<br/>
Fished within these seas and rivers.<br/>
Very well do I remember<br/>
How the fisherman disposes,<br/>
How he rigs his fishing vessel,<br/>
Lines, and gaffs, and poles, and fish-nets;<br/>
Hast not come a-fishing hither.<br/>
Whither goest, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Whither sailest, friend of waters?<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“I have come to catch some wild-geese,<br/>
Catch the hissing birds of Suomi,<br/>
In these far-extending borders,<br/>
In the Sachsensund dominions.”<br/>
Good Annikki gives this answer:<br/>
“Know I well a truthful speaker,<br/>
Easily detect a falsehood;<br/>
Formerly my aged father<br/>
Often came a-hunting hither,<br/>
Came to hunt the hissing wild-geese,<br/>
Hunt the red-bill of these waters.<br/>
Very well do I remember<br/>
How the hunter rigs his vessel,<br/>
Bows, and arrows, knives, and quiver,<br/>
Dogs enchained within the vessel,<br/>
Pointers hunting on the sea-shore,<br/>
Setters seeking in the marshes,<br/>
Tell the truth now Wainamoinen,<br/>
Whither is thy vessel sailing?”<br/>
Spake the hero of the Northland:<br/>
“To the wars my ship is sailing,<br/>
To the bloody fields of battle,<br/>
Where the streams run scarlet-colored,<br/>
Where the paths are paved with bodies!’<br/>
These the words of fair Annikki:<br/>
“Know I well the paths to battle.<br/>
Formerly my aged father<br/>
Often sounded war’s alarum,<br/>
Often led the hosts to conquest;<br/>
In each ship a hundred rowers,<br/>
And in arms a thousand heroes,<br/>
Oil the prow a thousand cross-bows,<br/>
Swords, and spears, and battle-axes;<br/>
Know I well the ship of battle.<br/>
Speak Do longer fruitless falsehoods,<br/>
Whither sailest, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Whither steerest, friend of waters?<br/>
These the words of Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Come, O maiden, to my vessel,<br/>
In my magic ship be seated,<br/>
Then I’ll give thee truthful answer.”<br/>
Thus Annikki, silver-tinselled,<br/>
Answers ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“With the winds I’ll fill thy vessel,<br/>
To thy bark I’ll send the storm-winds<br/>
And capsize thy ship of magic,<br/>
Break in pieces its forecastle,<br/>
If the truth thou dost not tell me,<br/>
If thou dost not cease thy falsehoods,<br/>
If thou dost not tell me truly<br/>
Whither sails thy magic vessel.”<br/>
These the words of Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Now I make thee truthful answer,<br/>
Though at first I spake deception:<br/>
I am sailing to the Northland<br/>
To the dismal Sariola,<br/>
Where the ogres live and flourish,<br/>
Where they drown the worthy heroes,<br/>
There to woo the Maid of Beauty<br/>
Sitting on the bow of heaven,<br/>
Woo and win the fairy virgin,<br/>
Bring her to my home and kindred,<br/>
To the firesides of Walnola.”<br/>
Then Aunikki, graceful maiden,<br/>
Of the Night and Dawn, the daughter,<br/>
As she heard the rightful answer,<br/>
Knew the truth was fully spoken,<br/>
Straightway left her coats unbeaten,<br/>
Left unwashed her linen garments,<br/>
Left unrinsed her silks and ribbons<br/>
On the highway by the sea-shore,<br/>
On the bridge of scarlet color<br/>
On her arm she threw her long-robes,<br/>
Hastened off with speed of roebuck<br/>
To the shops of Ilmarinen,<br/>
To the iron-forger’s furnace,<br/>
To the blacksmith’s home and smithy,<br/>
Here she found the hero-artist,<br/>
Forging out a bench of iron,<br/>
And adorning it with silver.<br/>
Soot lay thick upon his forehead,<br/>
Soot and coal upon his shoulders.<br/>
On the threshold speaks Annikki,<br/>
These the words his sister uses:<br/>
“Ilmarinen, dearest brother,<br/>
Thou eternal artist-forger,<br/>
Forge me now a loom of silver,<br/>
Golden rings to grace my fingers,<br/>
Forge me gold and silver ear-rings,<br/>
Six or seven golden girdles,<br/>
Golden crosslets for my bosom,<br/>
For my head forge golden trinkets,<br/>
And I’ll tell a tale surprising,<br/>
Tell a story that concerns thee<br/>
Truthfully I’ll tell the story.”<br/>
Then the blacksmith Ilmarinen<br/>
Spake and these the words he uttered:<br/>
“If thou’lt tell the tale sincerely,<br/>
I will forge the loom of silver,<br/>
Golden rings to grace thy fingers,<br/>
Forge thee gold and silver ear-rings,<br/>
Six or seven golden girdles,<br/>
Golden crosslets for thy bosom,<br/>
For thy head forge golden trinkets;<br/>
But if thou shouldst tell me falsely,<br/>
I shall break thy beauteous jewels,<br/>
Break thine ornaments in pieces,<br/>
Hurl them to the fire and furnace,<br/>
Never forge thee other trinkets.”<br/>
This the answer of Annikki:<br/>
“Ancient blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Dost thou ever think to marry<br/>
Her already thine affianced,<br/>
Beauteous Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Fairest virgin of the Northland,<br/>
Chosen bride of Sariola?<br/>
Shouldst thou wish the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Thou must forge, and forge unceasing,<br/>
Hammering the days and nights through;<br/>
Forge the summer hoofs for horses,<br/>
Forge them iron hoofs for winter,<br/>
In the long nights forge the snow-sledge,<br/>
Gaily trim it in the daytime,<br/>
Haste thou then upon thy journey<br/>
To thy wooing in the Northland,<br/>
To the dismal Sariola;<br/>
Thither journeys one more clever,<br/>
Sails another now before thee,<br/>
There to woo thy bride affianced,<br/>
Thence to lead thy chosen virgin,<br/>
Woo and win the Maid of Beauty;<br/>
Three long years thou hast been wooing.<br/>
Wainamoinen now is sailing<br/>
On the blue back of the waters,<br/>
Sitting at his helm of copper;<br/>
On the prow are golden carvings,<br/>
Beautiful his boat of magic,<br/>
Sailing fleetly o’er the billows,<br/>
To the never-pleasant Northland,<br/>
To the dismal Sariola.”<br/>
Ilmarinen stood in wonder,<br/>
Stood a statue at the story;<br/>
Silent grief had settled o’er him,<br/>
Settled o’er the iron-artist;<br/>
From one hand the tongs descended,<br/>
From the other fell the hammer,<br/>
As the blacksmith made this answer:<br/>
“Good Annikki, worthy sister,<br/>
I shall forge the loom of silver,<br/>
Golden rings to grace thy fingers,<br/>
Forge thee gold and silver ear-rings,<br/>
Six or seven golden girdles,<br/>
Golden crosslets for thy bosom;<br/>
Go and heat for me the bath-room,<br/>
Fill with heat the honey-chambers,<br/>
Lay the faggots on the fire-place,<br/>
Lay the smaller woods around them,<br/>
Pour some water through the ashes,<br/>
Make a soap of magic virtue,<br/>
Thus to cleanse my blackened visage,<br/>
Thus to cleanse the blacksmith’s body,<br/>
Thus remove the soot and ashes.”<br/>
Then Annikki, kindly sister,<br/>
Quickly warmed her brother’s bath-room,<br/>
Warmed it with the knots of fir-trees,<br/>
That the thunder-winds had broken;<br/>
Gathered pebbles from the fire-stream,<br/>
Threw them in the heating waters;<br/>
Broke the tassels from the birch-trees,<br/>
Steeped the foliage in honey,<br/>
Made a lye from milk and ashes,<br/>
Made of these a strong decoction,<br/>
Mixed it with the fat and marrow<br/>
Of the reindeer of the mountains,<br/>
Made a soap of magic virtue,<br/>
Thus to cleanse the iron-artist,<br/>
Thus to beautify the suitor,<br/>
Thus to make the hero worthy.<br/>
Ilmarinen, ancient blacksmith,<br/>
The eternal metal-worker,<br/>
Forged the wishes of his sister,<br/>
Ornaments for fair Annikki,<br/>
Rings, and bracelets, pins and ear-drops,<br/>
Forged for her six golden girdles,<br/>
Forged a weaving loom of silver,<br/>
While the maid prepared the bath-room,<br/>
Set his toilet-room in order.<br/>
To the maid he gave the trinkets,<br/>
Gave the loom of molten silver,<br/>
And the sister thus made answer:<br/>
“I have heated well thy bath-room,<br/>
Have thy toilet-things in order,<br/>
Everything as thou desirest;<br/>
Go prepare thyself for wooing,<br/>
Lave thy bead to flaxen whiteness,<br/>
Make thy cheeks look fresh and ruddy,<br/>
Lave thyself in Love’s aroma,<br/>
That thy wooing prove successful.”<br/>
Ilmarinen, magic artist,<br/>
Quick repairing to his bath-room,<br/>
Bathed his head to flaxen whiteness,<br/>
Made his cheeks look fresh and ruddy,<br/>
Laved his eyes until they sparkled<br/>
Like the moonlight on the waters;<br/>
Wondrous were his form and features,<br/>
And his cheeks like ruddy berries.<br/>
These the words of Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Fair Annikki, lovely sister,<br/>
Bring me now my silken raiment,<br/>
Bring my best and richest vesture,<br/>
Bring me now my softest linen,<br/>
That my wooing prove successful.”<br/>
Straightway did the helpful sister<br/>
Bring the finest of his raiment,<br/>
Bring the softest of his linen,<br/>
Raiment fashioned by his mother;<br/>
Brought to him his silken stockings,<br/>
Brought him shoes of marten-leather,<br/>
Brought a vest of sky-blue color,<br/>
Brought him scarlet-colored trousers,<br/>
Brought a coat with scarlet trimming,<br/>
Brought a red shawl trimmed in ermine<br/>
Fourfold wrapped about his body;<br/>
Brought a fur-coat made of seal-skin,<br/>
Fastened with a thousand bottons,<br/>
And adorned with countless jewels;<br/>
Brought for him his magic girdle,<br/>
Fastened well with golden buckles,<br/>
That his artist-mother fashioned;<br/>
Brought him gloves with golden wristlets,<br/>
That the Laplanders had woven<br/>
For a head of many ringlets;<br/>
Brought the finest cap in Northland,<br/>
That his ancient father purchased<br/>
When he first began his wooing.<br/>
Ilmarinen, blacksmith-artist,<br/>
Clad himself to look his finest,<br/>
When he thus addressed a servant:<br/>
“Hitch for me a fleet-foot racer,<br/>
Hitch him to my willing snow-sledge,<br/>
For I start upon a journey<br/>
To the distant shores of Pohya,<br/>
To the dismal Sariola.”<br/>
Spake the servant thus in answer:<br/>
“Thou hast seven fleet-foot racers,<br/>
Munching grain within their mangers,<br/>
Which of these shall I make ready?”<br/>
Spake the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Take the fleetest of my coursers,<br/>
Put the gray steed in the harness,<br/>
Hitch him to my sledge of magic;<br/>
Place six cuckoos on the break-board,<br/>
Seven bluebirds on the cross-bars,<br/>
Thus to charm the Northland maidens,<br/>
Thus to make them look and listen,<br/>
As the cuckoos call and echo.<br/>
Bring me too my largest bear-skin,<br/>
Fold it warm about the cross-bench;<br/>
Bring me then my marten fur-robes,<br/>
As a cover and protection.”<br/>
Straightway then the trusty servant<br/>
Of the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Put the gray steed in the harness,<br/>
Hitched the racer to the snow-sledge,<br/>
Placed six cuckoos on the break-board,<br/>
Seven bluebirds on the cross-bars,<br/>
On the front to sing and twitter;<br/>
Then he brought the largest bear-skin,<br/>
Folded it upon the cross-bench;<br/>
Brought the finest robes of marten,<br/>
Warm protection for the master.<br/>
Ilmarinen, forger-artist,<br/>
The eternal metal-worker,<br/>
Earnestly entreated Ukko:<br/>
“Send thy snow-flakes, Ukko, father,<br/>
Let them gently fall from heaven,<br/>
Let them cover all the heather,<br/>
Let them hide the berry-bushes,<br/>
That my sledge may glide in freedom<br/>
O’er the hills to Sariola!”<br/>
Ukko sent the snow from heaven,<br/>
Gently dropped the crystal snow-flakes,<br/>
Lending thus his kind assistance<br/>
To the hero, Ilmarinen,<br/>
On his journey to the Northland.<br/>
Reins in hand, the ancient artist<br/>
Seats him in his metal snow-sledge,<br/>
And beseeches thus his Master:<br/>
“Good luck to my reins and traces,<br/>
Good luck to my shafts and runners!<br/>
God protect my magic snow-sledge,<br/>
Be my safeguard on my journey<br/>
To the dismal Sariola!”<br/>
Now the ancient Ilmarinen<br/>
Draws the reins upon the racer,<br/>
Snaps his whip above the courser,<br/>
To the gray steed gives this order,<br/>
And the charger plunges northward:<br/>
“Haste away, my flaxen stallion,<br/>
Haste thee onward, noble white-face,<br/>
To the never-pleasant Pohya,<br/>
To the dreary Sariola!”<br/>
Fast and faster flies the fleet-foot,<br/>
On the curving snow-capped sea-coast,<br/>
On the borders of the lowlands,<br/>
O’er the alder-hills and mountains.<br/>
Merrily the steed flies onward,<br/>
Bluebirds singing, cuckoos calling,<br/>
On the sea-shore looking northward,<br/>
Through the sand and falling snow-flakes<br/>
Blinding winds, and snow, and sea-foam,<br/>
Cloud the hero, Ilmarinen,<br/>
As he glides upon his journey,<br/>
Looking seaward for the vessel<br/>
Of the ancient Wainamoinen;<br/>
Travels one day, then a second,<br/>
Travels all the next day northward,<br/>
Till the third day Ilmarinen<br/>
Overtakes old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Rails him in his magic vessel,<br/>
And addresses thus the minstrel:<br/>
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Let us woo in peace the maiden,<br/>
Fairest daughter or the Northland,<br/>
Sitting on the bow of heaven,<br/>
Let each labor long to win her,<br/>
Let her wed the one she chooses,<br/>
Him selecting, let her follow.”<br/>
Wainamoinen thus makes answer:<br/>
“I agree to thy proposal,<br/>
Let us woo in peace the maiden,<br/>
Not by force, nor faithless measures,<br/>
Shall we woo the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Let her follow him she chooses;<br/>
Let the unsuccessful suitor<br/>
Harbor neither wrath nor envy<br/>
For the hero that she follows.”<br/>
Thus agreeing, on they journey,<br/>
Each according to his pleasure;<br/>
Fleetly does the steed fly onward,<br/>
Quickly flies the magic vessel,<br/>
Sailing on the broad-sea northward;<br/>
Ilmarinen’s fleet-foot racer<br/>
Makes the hills of Northland tremble,<br/>
As he gallops on his journey<br/>
To the dismal Sariola.<br/>
Wainamoinen calls the South-winds,<br/>
And they fly to his assistance;<br/>
Swiftly sails his ship of beauty,<br/>
Swiftly plows the rough sea-billows<br/>
In her pathway to Pohyola.<br/>
Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
Scarce a moment had passed over,<br/>
Ere the dogs began their barking,<br/>
In the mansions of the Northland,<br/>
In the courts of Sariola,<br/>
Watch-dogs of the court of Louhi;<br/>
Never had they growled so fiercely,<br/>
Never had they barked so loudly,<br/>
Never with their tails had beaten<br/>
Northland into such an uproar.<br/>
Spake the master of Pohyola:<br/>
“Go and learn, my worthy daughter,<br/>
Why the watch-dogs have been barking,<br/>
Why the black-dog signals danger.”<br/>
Quickly does the daughter answer:<br/>
“I am occupied, dear father,<br/>
I have work of more importance,<br/>
I must tend my flock of lambkins,<br/>
I must turn the nether millstone,<br/>
Grind to flour the grains of barley,<br/>
Run the grindings through the sifter,<br/>
Only have I time for grinding.”<br/>
Lowly growls the faithful watch-dog,<br/>
Seldom does he growl so strangely.<br/>
Spake the master of Pohyola:<br/>
“Go and learn, my trusted consort,<br/>
Why the Northland dogs are barking,<br/>
Why the black-dog signals danger.”<br/>
Thus his aged wife makes answer;<br/>
“Have no time, nor inclination,<br/>
I must feed my hungry household,<br/>
Must prepare a worthy dinner,<br/>
I must bake the toothsome biscuit,<br/>
Knead the dough till it is ready,<br/>
Only have I strength for kneading.”<br/>
Spake the master of Pohyola:<br/>
“Dames are always in a hurry,<br/>
Maidens too are ever busy,<br/>
Whether warming at the oven,<br/>
Or asleep upon their couches;<br/>
Go my son, and learn the danger,<br/>
Why the black-dog growls displeasure,”<br/>
Quickly does the son give answer:<br/>
“Have no time, nor inclination,<br/>
Am in haste to grind my hatchet;<br/>
I must chop this log to cordwood,<br/>
For the fire must cut the faggots,<br/>
I must split the wood in fragments,<br/>
Large the pile and small the fire-wood,<br/>
Only have I strength for chopping.”<br/>
Still the watch-dog growls in anger,<br/>
Growl the whelps within the mansion,<br/>
Growl the dogs chained in the kennel,<br/>
Growls the black-dog on the hill-top,<br/>
Setting Northland in an uproar.<br/>
Spake the master of Pohyola:<br/>
“Never, never does my black-dog<br/>
Growl like this without a reason;<br/>
Never does he bark for nothing,<br/>
Does not growl at angry billows,<br/>
Nor the sighing of the pine-trees.”<br/>
Then the master of Pohyola<br/>
Went himself to learn the reason<br/>
For the barking of the watch-dogs;<br/>
Strode he through the spacious court-yard,<br/>
Through the open fields beyond it,<br/>
To the summit of the uplands.<br/>
Looking toward his black-dog barking,<br/>
He beholds the muzzle pointed<br/>
To a distant, stormy hill-top,<br/>
To a mound with alders covered;<br/>
There he learned the rightful reason,<br/>
Why his dogs had barked so loudly,<br/>
Why had growled the wool-tail bearer,<br/>
Why his whelps had signalled danger.<br/>
At full sail, he saw a vessel,<br/>
And the ship was scarlet-colored,<br/>
Entering the bay of Lempo;<br/>
Saw a sledge of magic colors,<br/>
Gliding up the curving sea-shore,<br/>
O’er the snow-fields of Pohyola.<br/>
Then the master of the Northland<br/>
Hastened straightway to his dwelling,<br/>
Hastened forward to his court-room,<br/>
These the accents of the master:<br/>
“Often strangers journey hither,<br/>
On the blue back of the ocean,<br/>
Sailing in a scarlet vessel,<br/>
Rocking in the bay of Lempo;<br/>
Often strangers come in sledges<br/>
To the honey-lands of Louhi.”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
How shall we obtain a token<br/>
Why these strangers journey hither?<br/>
My beloved, faithful daughter,<br/>
Lay a branch upon the fire-place,<br/>
Let it burn with fire of magic<br/>
If it trickle drops of scarlet,<br/>
War and bloodshed do they bring us;<br/>
If it trickle drops of water,<br/>
Peace and plenty bring the strangers.”<br/>
Northland’s fair and slender maiden,<br/>
Beautiful and modest daughter,<br/>
Lays a sorb-branch on the fire-place,<br/>
Lights it with the fire of magic;<br/>
Does not trickle drops of scarlet,<br/>
Trickles neither blood, nor water,<br/>
From the wand come drops of honey.<br/>
From the corner spake Suowakko,<br/>
This the language of the wizard:<br/>
“If the wand is dripping honey,<br/>
Then the strangers that are coming<br/>
Are but worthy friends and suitors.”<br/>
Then the hostess of the Northland,<br/>
With the daughter of the hostess,<br/>
Straightway left their work, and hastened<br/>
From their dwelling to the court-yard;<br/>
Looked about in all directions,<br/>
Turned their eyes upon the waters,<br/>
Saw a magic-colored vessel<br/>
Rocking slowly in the harbor,<br/>
Having sailed the bay of Lempo,<br/>
Triple sails, and masts, and rigging,<br/>
Sable was the nether portion,<br/>
And the upper, scarlet-colored,<br/>
At the helm an ancient hero<br/>
Leaning on his oars of copper;<br/>
Saw a fleet-foot racer running,<br/>
Saw a red sledge lightly follow,<br/>
Saw the magic sledge emblazoned,<br/>
Guided toward the courts of Louhi;<br/>
Saw and heard six golden cuckoos<br/>
Sitting on the break-board, calling,<br/>
Seven bluebirds richly colored<br/>
Singing from the yoke and cross-bar;<br/>
In the sledge a magic hero,<br/>
Young, and strong, and proud, and handsome,<br/>
Holding reins upon the courser.<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Dearest daughter, winsome maiden,<br/>
Dost thou wish a noble suitor?<br/>
Should these heroes come to woo thee,<br/>
Wouldst thou leave thy home and country,<br/>
Be the bride of him that pleases,<br/>
Be his faithful life-companion?<br/>
“He that comes upon the waters,<br/>
Sailing in a magic vessel,<br/>
Having sailed the bay of Lempo,<br/>
Is the good, old Wainamoinen;<br/>
In his ship are countless treasures,<br/>
Richest presents from Wainola.<br/>
“He that rides here in his snow-sledge<br/>
In his sledge of magic beauty,<br/>
With the cuckoos and the bluebirds,<br/>
Is the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Cometh hither empty-handed,<br/>
Only brings some wisdom-sayings.<br/>
When they come within the dwelling,<br/>
Bring a bowl of honeyed viands,<br/>
Bring a pitcher with two handles,<br/>
Give to him that thou wouldst follow<br/>
Give it to old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Him that brings thee countless treasures,<br/>
Costly presents in his vessel,<br/>
Priceless gems from Kalevala.”<br/>
Spake the Northland’s lovely daughter,<br/>
This the language of the maiden<br/>
“Good, indeed, advice maternal,<br/>
But I will not wed for riches,<br/>
Wed no man for countless treasures;<br/>
For his worth I’ll choose a husband,<br/>
For his youth and fine appearance,<br/>
For his noble form and features;<br/>
In the olden times the maidens<br/>
Were not sold by anxious mothers<br/>
To the suitors that they loved not.<br/>
I shall choose without his treasures<br/>
Ilmarinen for his wisdom,<br/>
For his worth and good behavior,<br/>
Him that forged the wondrous Sampo,<br/>
Hammered thee the lid in colors.”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Senseless daughter, child of folly,<br/>
Thus to choose the ancient blacksmith,<br/>
From whose brow drips perspiration,<br/>
Evermore to rinse his linen,<br/>
Lave his hands, and eyes, and forehead,<br/>
Keep his ancient house in order;<br/>
Little use his wit and wisdom<br/>
When compared with gold and silver.”<br/>
This the answer of the daughter:<br/>
“I will never, never, never,<br/>
Wed the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
With his gold and priceless jewels;<br/>
Never will I be a helpmate<br/>
To a hero in his dotage,<br/>
Little thanks my compensation.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, safely landing<br/>
In advance of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Pulls his gaily-covered vessel<br/>
From the waves upon the sea-beach,<br/>
On the cylinders of birch-wood,<br/>
On the rollers copper-banded,<br/>
Straightway hastens to the guest-room<br/>
Of the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Of the master of the Northland,<br/>
Speaks these words upon the threshold<br/>
To the famous Maid of Beauty:<br/>
“Come with me, thou lovely virgin,<br/>
Be my bride and life-companion,<br/>
Share with me my joys and sorrows,<br/>
Be my honored wife hereafter!”<br/>
This the answer of the maiden:<br/>
“Hast thou built for me the vessel,<br/>
Built for me the ship of magic<br/>
From the fragments of the distaff,<br/>
From the splinters of the spindle?”<br/>
Wainamoinen thus replying:<br/>
“I have built the promised vessel,<br/>
Built the wondrous ship for sailing,<br/>
Firmly joined the parts by magic;<br/>
It will weather roughest billows,<br/>
Will outlive the winds and waters,<br/>
Swiftly glide upon the blue-back<br/>
Of the deep and boundless ocean<br/>
It will ride the waves in beauty,<br/>
Like an airy bubble rising,<br/>
Like a cork on lake and river,<br/>
Through the angry seas of Northland,<br/>
Through Pohyola’s peaceful waters.”<br/>
Northland’s fair and slender daughter<br/>
Gives this answer to her suitor:<br/>
“Will not wed a sea-born hero,<br/>
Do not care to rock the billows,<br/>
Cannot live with such a husband<br/>
Storms would bring us pain and trouble,<br/>
Winds would rack our hearts and temples;<br/>
Therefore thee I cannot follow,<br/>
Cannot keep thy home in order,<br/>
Cannot be thy life-companion,<br/>
Cannot wed old Wainamoinen.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap19"/>RUNE XIX.<br/>
ILMARINEN’S WOOING.</h2>
<p>Ilmarinen, hero-blacksmith,<br/>
The eternal metal-worker,<br/>
Hastens forward to the court-room<br/>
Of the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Of the master of the Northland,<br/>
Hastens through the open portals<br/>
Into Louhi’s home and presence.<br/>
Servants come with silver pitchers,<br/>
Filled with Northland’s richest brewing;<br/>
Honey-drink is brought and offered<br/>
To the blacksmith of Wainola,<br/>
Ilmarinen thus replying:<br/>
“I shall not in all my life-time<br/>
Taste the drink that thou hast brought me,<br/>
Till I see the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Fairy Maiden of the Rainbow;<br/>
I will drink with her in gladness,<br/>
For whose hand I journey hither.”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Trouble does the one selected<br/>
Give to him that wooes and watches;<br/>
Not yet are her feet in sandals,<br/>
Thine affianced is not ready.<br/>
Only canst thou woo my daughter,<br/>
Only canst thou win the maiden,<br/>
When thou hast by aid of magic<br/>
Plowed the serpent-field of Hisi,<br/>
Plowed the field of hissing vipers,<br/>
Touching neither beam nor handles.<br/>
Once this field was plowed by Piru,<br/>
Lempo furrowed it with horses,<br/>
With a plowshare made of copper,<br/>
With a beam of flaming iron;<br/>
Never since has any hero<br/>
Brought this field to cultivation.”<br/>
Ilmarinen of Wainola<br/>
Straightway hastens to the chamber<br/>
Of the Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Speaks these words in hesitation:<br/>
“Thou of Night and Dawn the daughter,<br/>
Tell me, dost thou not remember<br/>
When for thee I forged the Sampo,<br/>
Hammered thee the lid in colors?<br/>
Thou didst swear by oath the strougest,<br/>
By the forge and by the anvil,<br/>
By the tongs and by the hammer,<br/>
In the ears of the Almighty,<br/>
And before omniscient Ukko,<br/>
Thou wouldst follow me hereafter,<br/>
Be my bride, my life-companion,<br/>
Be my honored wife forever.<br/>
Now thy mother is exacting,<br/>
Will not give to me her daughter,<br/>
Till by means of magic only,<br/>
I have plowed the field of serpents,<br/>
Plowed the hissing soil of Hisi.”<br/>
The affianced Bride of Beauty<br/>
Gives this answer to the suitor:<br/>
“O, thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The eternal wonder-forger,<br/>
Forge thyself a golden plowshare,<br/>
Forge the beam of shining silver,<br/>
And of copper forge the handles;<br/>
Then with ease, by aid of magic,<br/>
Thou canst plow the field of serpents,<br/>
Plow the hissing soil of Hisi.”<br/>
Ilmarinen, welcome suitor,<br/>
Straightway builds a forge and smithy,<br/>
Places gold within the furnace,<br/>
In the forge he lays the silver,<br/>
Forges then a golden plowshare,<br/>
Forges, too, a beam of silver,<br/>
Forges handles out of copper,<br/>
Forges boots and gloves of iron,<br/>
Forges him a mail of metal,<br/>
For his limbs a safe protection,<br/>
Safe protection for his body.<br/>
Then a horse of fire selecting,<br/>
Harnesses the flaming stallion,<br/>
Goes to plow the field of serpents,<br/>
Plow the viper-lands of Hisi.<br/>
In the field were countless vipers,<br/>
Serpents there of every species,<br/>
Crawling, writhing, hissing, stinging,<br/>
Harmless all against the hero,<br/>
Thus he stills the snakes of Lempo:<br/>
“Vipers, ye by God created,<br/>
Neither best nor worst of creatures,<br/>
Ye whose wisdom comes from Ukko,<br/>
And whose venom comes from Hisi,<br/>
Ukko is your greater Master,<br/>
By His will your heads are lifted;<br/>
Get ye hence before my plowing,<br/>
Writ-he ye through the grass and stubble,<br/>
Crawl ye to the nearest thicket,<br/>
Keep your heads beneath the heather,<br/>
Hunt our holes to Mana’s kingdom<br/>
If your poison-heads be lifted,<br/>
Then will mighty Ukko smite them<br/>
‘With his iron-pointed arrows,<br/>
With the lightning of his anger.”<br/>
Thus the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Safely plows the field of serpents,<br/>
Lifts the vipers in his plowing,<br/>
Buries them beneath the furrow,<br/>
Harmless all against his magic.<br/>
When the task had been completed,<br/>
Ilmarinen, quick returning,<br/>
Thus addressed Pohyola’s hostess:<br/>
“I have plowed the field of Hisi,<br/>
Plowed the field of hissing serpents,<br/>
Stilled and banished all the vipers;<br/>
Give me, ancient dame, thy daughter,<br/>
Fairest maiden of the Northland.<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Shall not grant to thee my daughter,<br/>
Shall not give my lovely virgin,<br/>
Till Tuoni’s bear is muzzled,<br/>
Till Manala’s wolf is conquered,<br/>
In the forests of the Death-land,<br/>
In the boundaries of Mana.<br/>
Hundreds have been sent to hunt him,<br/>
So one yet has been successful,<br/>
All have perished in Manala.”<br/>
Thereupon young Ilmarinen<br/>
To the maiden’s chamber hastens,<br/>
Thus addresses his affianced:<br/>
“Still another test demanded,<br/>
I must go to Tuonela,<br/>
Bridle there the bear of Mana,<br/>
Bring him from the Death-land forests,<br/>
From Tuoni’s grove and empire!<br/>
This advice the maiden gives him:<br/>
“O thou artist, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The eternal metal-worker,<br/>
Forge of steel a magic bridle,<br/>
On a rock beneath the water,<br/>
In the foaming triple currents;<br/>
Make the straps of steel and copper,<br/>
Bridle then the bear of Mana,<br/>
Lead him from Tuoni’s forests.”<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Forged of steel a magic bridle,<br/>
On a rock beneath the water,<br/>
In the foam of triple currents;<br/>
Made the straps of steel and copper,<br/>
Straightway went the bear to muzzle,<br/>
In the forests of the Death-land,<br/>
Spake these words in supplication:<br/>
“Terhenetar, ether-maiden,<br/>
Daughter of the fog and snow-flake,<br/>
Sift the fog and let it settle<br/>
O’er the bills and lowland thickets,<br/>
Where the wild-bear feeds and lingers,<br/>
That he may not see my coming,<br/>
May not hear my stealthy footsteps!”<br/>
Terhenetar hears his praying,<br/>
Makes the fog and snow-flake settle<br/>
On the coverts of the wild-beasts;<br/>
Thus the bear he safely bridles,<br/>
Fetters him in chains of magic,<br/>
In the forests of Tuoni,<br/>
In the blue groves of Manala.<br/>
When this task had been completed,<br/>
Ilmarinen, quick returning,<br/>
Thus addressed the ancient Louhi:<br/>
“Give me, worthy dame, thy daughter,<br/>
Give me now my bride affianced,<br/>
I have brought the bear of Mana<br/>
From Tuoni’s fields and forests.”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola<br/>
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“I will only give my daughter,<br/>
Give to thee the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
When the monster-pike thou catchest<br/>
In the river of Tuoni,<br/>
In Manala’s fatal waters,<br/>
Using neither hooks, nor fish-nets,<br/>
Neither boat, nor fishing-tackle;<br/>
Hundreds have been sent to catch him,<br/>
No one yet has been successful,<br/>
All have perished in Manala.”<br/>
Much disheartened, Ilmarinen<br/>
Hastened to the maiden’s chamber,<br/>
Thus addressed the rainbow-maiden:<br/>
“Now a third test is demanded,<br/>
Much more difficult than ever;<br/>
I must catch the pike of Mana,<br/>
In the river of Tuoni,<br/>
And without my fishing-tackle,<br/>
Hard the third test of the hero!<br/>
This advice the maiden gives him:<br/>
“O thou hero, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Never, never be discouraged:<br/>
In thy furnace, forge an eagle,<br/>
From the fire of ancient magic;<br/>
He will catch the pike of Mana,<br/>
Catch the monster-fish in safety,<br/>
From the death-stream of Tuoni,<br/>
From Manala’s fatal waters.”<br/>
Then the suitor, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The eternal artist-forgeman,<br/>
In the furnace forged an eagle<br/>
From the fire of ancient wisdom;<br/>
For this giant bird of magic<br/>
Forged he talons out of iron,<br/>
And his beak of steel and copper;<br/>
Seats himself upon the eagle,<br/>
On his back between the wing-bones,<br/>
Thus addresses he his creature,<br/>
Gives the bird of fire, this order:<br/>
“Mighty eagle, bird of beauty,<br/>
Fly thou whither I direct thee,<br/>
To Tuoni’s coal-black river,<br/>
To the blue deeps of the Death-stream,<br/>
Seize the mighty fish of Mana,<br/>
Catch for me this water-monster.”<br/>
Swiftly flies the magic eagle,<br/>
Giant-bird of worth and wonder,<br/>
To the river of Tuoni,<br/>
There to catch the pike of Mana;<br/>
One wing brushes on the waters,<br/>
While the other sweeps the heavens;<br/>
In the ocean dips his talons,<br/>
Whets his beak on mountain-ledges.<br/>
Safely landing, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The immortal artist-forger,<br/>
Hunts the monster of the Death-stream,<br/>
While the eagle hunts and fishes<br/>
In the waters of Manala.<br/>
From the river rose a monster,<br/>
Grasped the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Tried to drag him to his sea-cave;<br/>
Quick the eagle pounced upon him,<br/>
With his metal-beak he seized him,<br/>
Wrenched his head, and rent his body,<br/>
Hurled him back upon the bottom<br/>
Of the deep and fatal river,<br/>
Freed his master, Ilmarinen.<br/>
Then arose the pike of Mana,<br/>
Came the water-dog in silence,<br/>
Of the pikes was not the largest,<br/>
Nor belonged he to the smallest;<br/>
Tongue the length of double hatchets,<br/>
Teeth as long as fen-rake handles,<br/>
Mouth as broad as triple streamlets,<br/>
Back as wide as seven sea-boats,<br/>
Tried to snap the magic blacksmith,<br/>
Tried to swallow Ilmarinen.<br/>
Swiftly swoops the mighty eagle,<br/>
Of the birds was not the largest,<br/>
Nor belonged he to the smallest;<br/>
Mouth as wide as seven streamlets,<br/>
Tongue as long as seven javelins,<br/>
Like five crooked scythes his talons;<br/>
Swoops upon the pike of Mana.<br/>
Quick the giant fish endangered,<br/>
Darts and flounders in the river,<br/>
Dragging down the mighty eagle,<br/>
Lashing up the very bottom<br/>
To the surface of the river;<br/>
When the mighty bird uprising<br/>
Leaves the wounded pike in water,<br/>
Soars aloft on worsted pinions<br/>
To his home in upper ether;<br/>
Soars awhile, and sails, and circles,<br/>
Circles o’er the reddened waters,<br/>
Swoops again on lightning-pinions,<br/>
Strikes with mighty force his talons<br/>
Into the shoulder of his victim;<br/>
Strikes the second of his talons<br/>
On the flinty mountain-ledges,<br/>
On the rocks with iron hardened;<br/>
From the cliffs rebound his talons,<br/>
Slip the flinty rocks o’erhanging,<br/>
And the monster-pike resisting<br/>
Dives again beneath the surface<br/>
To the bottom of the river,<br/>
From the talons of the eagle;<br/>
Deep, the wounds upon the body<br/>
Of the monster of Tuoni.<br/>
Still a third time soars the eagle,<br/>
Soars, and sails, and quickly circles,<br/>
Swoops again upon the monster,<br/>
Fire out-shooting from his pinoins,<br/>
Both his eyeballs flashing lightning;<br/>
With his beak of steel and copper<br/>
Grasps again the pike of Mana<br/>
Firmly planted are his talons<br/>
In the rocks and in his victim,<br/>
Drags the monster from the river,<br/>
Lifts the pike above the waters,<br/>
From Tuoni’s coal-black river,<br/>
From the blue-back of Manala.<br/>
Thus the third time does the eagle<br/>
Bring success from former failures;<br/>
Thus at last the eagle catches<br/>
Mana’s pike, the worst of fishes,<br/>
Swiftest swimmer of the waters,<br/>
From the river of Tuoni;<br/>
None could see Manala’s river,<br/>
For the myriad of fish-scales;<br/>
Hardly could one see through ether,<br/>
For the feathers of the eagle,<br/>
Relicts of the mighty contest.<br/>
Then the bird of copper talons<br/>
Took the pike, with scales of silver,<br/>
To the pine-tree’s topmost branches,<br/>
To the fir-tree plumed with needles,<br/>
Tore the monster-fish in pieces,<br/>
Ate the body of his victim,<br/>
Left the head for Ilmarinen.<br/>
Spake the blacksmith to the eagle:<br/>
“O thou bird of evil nature,<br/>
What thy thought and what thy motive?<br/>
Thou hast eaten what I needed,<br/>
Evidence of my successes;<br/>
Thoughtless eagle, witless instinct,<br/>
Thus to mar the spoils of conquest!”<br/>
But the bird of metal talons<br/>
Hastened onward, soaring upward,<br/>
Rising higher into ether,<br/>
Rising, flying, soaring, sailing,<br/>
To the borders of the long-clouds,<br/>
Made the vault of ether tremble,<br/>
Split apart the dome of heaven,<br/>
Broke the colored bow of Ukko,<br/>
Tore the Moon-horns from their sockets,<br/>
Disappeared beyond the Sun-land,<br/>
To the home of the triumphant.<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Took the pike-head to the hostess<br/>
Of the ever-dismal Northland,<br/>
Thus addressed the ancient Louhi:<br/>
“Let this head forever serve thee<br/>
As a guest-bench for thy dwelling,<br/>
Evidence of hero-triumphs;<br/>
I have caught the pike of Mana,<br/>
I have done as thou demandest,<br/>
Three my victories in Death-land,<br/>
Three the tests of magic heroes;<br/>
Wilt thou give me now thy daughter,<br/>
Give to me the Maid of Beauty?”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Badly is the test accomplished,<br/>
Thou has torn the pike in pieces,<br/>
From his neck the head is severed,<br/>
Of his body thou hast eaten,<br/>
Brought to me this worthless relic!<br/>
These the words of Ilmarinen:<br/>
“When the victory is greatest,<br/>
Do we suffer greatest losses!<br/>
From the river of Tuoni,<br/>
From the kingdom of Manala,<br/>
I have brought to thee this trophy,<br/>
Thus the third task is completed.<br/>
Tell me is the maiden ready,<br/>
Wilt thou give the bride affianced?<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“I will give to thee my daughter,<br/>
Will prepare my snow-white virgin,<br/>
For the suitor, Ilmarinen;<br/>
Thou hast won the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Bride is she of thine hereafter,<br/>
Fit companion of thy fireside,<br/>
Help and joy of all thy lifetime.”<br/>
On the floor a child was sitting,<br/>
And the babe this tale related.<br/>
“There appeared within this dwelling,<br/>
Came a bird within the castle,<br/>
From the East came flying hither,<br/>
From the East, a monstrous eagle,<br/>
One wing touched the vault of heaven,<br/>
While the other swept the ocean;<br/>
With his tail upon the waters,<br/>
Reached his beak beyond the cloudlets,<br/>
Looked about, and eager watching,<br/>
Flew around, and sailing, soaring,<br/>
Flew away to hero-castle,<br/>
Knocked three times with beak of copper<br/>
On the castle-roof of iron;<br/>
But the eagle could not enter.<br/>
“Then the eagle, looking round him,<br/>
Flew again, and sailed, and circled,<br/>
Flew then to the mothers’ castle,<br/>
Loudly rapped with heavy knocking<br/>
On the mothers’ roof of copper;<br/>
But the eagle could not enter.<br/>
“Then the eagle, looking round him,<br/>
Flew a third time, sailing, soaring,<br/>
Flew then to the virgins’ castle,<br/>
Knocked again with beak of copper,<br/>
On the virgins’ roof of linen,<br/>
Easy for him there to enter;<br/>
Flew upon the castle-chimney,<br/>
Quick descending to the chamber,<br/>
Pulled the clapboards from the studding,<br/>
Tore the linen from the rafters,<br/>
Perched upon the chamber-window,<br/>
Near the walls of many colors,<br/>
On the cross-bars gaily-feathered,<br/>
Looked upon the curly-beaded,<br/>
Looked upon their golden ringlets,<br/>
Looked upon the snow-white virgins,<br/>
On the purest of the maidens,<br/>
On the fairest of the daughters,<br/>
On the maid with pearly necklace,<br/>
On the maiden wreathed in flowers;<br/>
Perched awhile, and looked, admiring,<br/>
Swooped upon the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
On the purest of the virgins,<br/>
On the whitest, on the fairest,<br/>
On the stateliest and grandest,<br/>
Swooped upon the rainbow-daughter<br/>
Of the dismal Sariola;<br/>
Grasped her in his mighty talons,<br/>
Bore away the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Maid of fairest form and feature,<br/>
Maid adorned with pearly necklace,<br/>
Decked in feathers iridescent,<br/>
Fragrant flowers upon her bosom,<br/>
Scarlet band around her forehead,<br/>
Golden rings upon her fingers,<br/>
Fairest maiden of the Northland.”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
When the babe his tale had ended:<br/>
“Tell me bow, my child beloved,<br/>
Thou hast learned about the maiden,<br/>
Hast obtained the information,<br/>
How her flaxen ringlets nestled,<br/>
How the maiden’s silver glistened,<br/>
How the virgin’s gold was lauded.<br/>
Shone the silver Sun upon thee,<br/>
Did the moonbeams bring this knowledge?”<br/>
From the floor the child made answer:<br/>
“Thus I gained the information,<br/>
Moles of good-luck led me hither,<br/>
To the home, of the distinguished,<br/>
To the guest-room of the maiden,<br/>
Good-name bore her worthy father,<br/>
He that sailed the magic vessel;<br/>
Better-name enjoyed the mother,<br/>
She that baked the bread of barley,<br/>
She that kneaded wheaten biscuits,<br/>
Fed her many guests in Northland.<br/>
“Thus the information reached me,<br/>
Thus the distant stranger heard it,<br/>
Heard the virgin had arisen:<br/>
Once I walked within the court-yard,<br/>
Stepping near the virgin’s chamber,<br/>
At an early hour of morning,<br/>
Ere the Sun had broken slumber<br/>
Whirling rose the soot in cloudlets,<br/>
Blackened wreaths of smoke came rising<br/>
From the chamber of the maiden,<br/>
From thy daughter’s lofty chimney;<br/>
There the maid was busy grinding,<br/>
Moved the handles of the millstone<br/>
Making voices like the cuckoo,<br/>
Like the ducks the side-holes sounded,<br/>
And the sifter like the goldfinch,<br/>
Like the sea-pearls sang the grindstones.<br/>
“Then a second time I wandered<br/>
To the border of the meadow<br/>
In the forest was the maiden<br/>
Rocking on a fragrant hillock,<br/>
Dyeing red in iron vessels,<br/>
And in copper kettles, yellow.<br/>
“Then a third time did I wander<br/>
To the lovely maiden’s window;<br/>
There I saw thy daughter weaving,<br/>
Heard the flying of her shuttle,<br/>
Heard the beating of her loom-lathe,<br/>
Heard the rattling of her treddles,<br/>
Heard the whirring of her yarn-reel.”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Now alas! beloved daughter,<br/>
I have often taught this lesson:<br/>
‘Do not sing among the pine-trees,<br/>
Do not call adown the valleys,<br/>
Do not hang thy head in walking,<br/>
Do not bare thine arms, nor shoulders,<br/>
Keep the secrets of thy bosom,<br/>
Hide thy beauty and thy power.’<br/>
“This I told thee in the autumn,<br/>
Taught thee in the summer season,<br/>
Sang thee in the budding spring-time,<br/>
Sang thee when the snows were falling:<br/>
‘Let us build a place for hiding,<br/>
Let us build the smallest windows,<br/>
Where may weave my fairest daughter,<br/>
Where my maid may ply her shuttle,<br/>
Where my joy may work unnoticed<br/>
By the heroes of the Northland,<br/>
By the suitors of Wainola.’”<br/>
From the floor the child made answer,<br/>
Fourteen days the young child numbered;<br/>
“Easy ’tis to hide a war-horse<br/>
In the Northland fields and stables;<br/>
Hard indeed to hide a maiden,<br/>
Having lovely form and features!<br/>
Build of stone a distant castle<br/>
In the middle of the ocean,<br/>
Keep within thy lovely maiden,<br/>
Train thou there thy winsome daughter,<br/>
Not long hidden canst thou keep her.<br/>
Maidens will not grow and flourish,<br/>
Kept apart from men and heroes,<br/>
Will not live without their suitors,<br/>
Will not thrive without their wooers;<br/>
Thou canst never hide a maiden,<br/>
Neither on the land nor water.”<br/>
Now the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Head down-bent and heavy-hearted,<br/>
Wanders to his native country,<br/>
To Wainola’s peaceful meadows,<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala,<br/>
Chanting as he journeys homeward:<br/>
“I have passed the age for wooing,<br/>
Woe is me, rejected suitor,<br/>
Woe is me, a witless minstrel,<br/>
That I did not woo and marry,<br/>
When my face was young and winsome,<br/>
When my hand was warm and welcome!<br/>
Youth dethrones my age and station,<br/>
Wealth is nothing, wisdom worthless,<br/>
When a hero goes a-wooing<br/>
With a poor but younger brother.<br/>
Fatal error that a hero<br/>
Does not wed in early manhood,<br/>
In his youth does not be master<br/>
Of a worthy wife and household.”<br/>
Thus the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Sends the edict to his people:<br/>
“Old men must not go a-wooing,<br/>
Must not swim the sea of anger,<br/>
Must not row upon a wager,<br/>
Must not run a race for glory,<br/>
With the younger sons of Northland.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap20"/>RUNE XX.<br/>
THE BREWING OF BEER.</h2>
<p>Now we sing the wondrous legends,<br/>
Songs of wedding-feasts and dances,<br/>
Sing the melodies of wedlock,<br/>
Sing the songs of old tradition;<br/>
Sing of Ilmarinen’s marriage<br/>
To the Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Fairest daughter of the Northland,<br/>
Sing the drinking-songs of Pohya.<br/>
Long prepared they for the wedding<br/>
In Pohyola’s halls and chambers,<br/>
In the courts of Sariola;<br/>
Many things that Louhi ordered,<br/>
Great indeed the preparations<br/>
For the marriage of the daughter,<br/>
For the feasting of the heroes,<br/>
For the drinking of the strangers,<br/>
For the feeding of the poor-folk,<br/>
For the people’s entertainment.<br/>
Grew an ox in far Karjala,<br/>
Not the largest, nor the smallest,<br/>
Was the ox that grew in Suomi;<br/>
But his size was all-sufficient,<br/>
For his tail was sweeping Jamen,<br/>
And his head was over Kemi,<br/>
Horns in length a hundred fathoms,<br/>
Longer than the horns his mouth was;<br/>
Seven days it took a weasel<br/>
To encircle neck and shoulders;<br/>
One whole day a swallow journeyed<br/>
From one horn-tip to the other,<br/>
Did not stop between for resting.<br/>
Thirty days the squirrel travelled<br/>
From the tail to reach the shoulders,<br/>
But he could not gain the horn-tip<br/>
Till the Moon had long passed over.<br/>
This young ox of huge dimensions,<br/>
This great calf of distant Suomi,<br/>
Was conducted from Karjala<br/>
To the meadows of Pohyola;<br/>
At each horn a hundred heroes,<br/>
At his head and neck a thousand.<br/>
When the mighty ox was lassoed,<br/>
Led away to Northland pastures,<br/>
Peacefully the monster journeyed<br/>
By the bays of Sariola,<br/>
Ate the pasture on the borders;<br/>
To the clouds arose his shoulders,<br/>
And his horns to highest heaven.<br/>
Not in all of Sariola<br/>
Could a butcher be discovered<br/>
That could kill the ox for Louhi,<br/>
None of all the sons of Northland,<br/>
In her hosts of giant people,<br/>
In her rising generation,<br/>
In the hosts of those grown older.<br/>
Came a hero from a distance,<br/>
Wirokannas from Karelen,<br/>
And these words the gray-beard uttered:<br/>
“Wait, O wait, thou ox of Suomi,<br/>
Till I bring my ancient war-club;<br/>
Then I’ll smite thee on thy forehead,<br/>
Break thy skull, thou willing victim!<br/>
Nevermore wilt thou in summer<br/>
Browse the woods of Sariola,<br/>
Bare our pastures, fields, and forests;<br/>
Thou, O ox, wilt feed no longer<br/>
Through the length and breadth of Northland,<br/>
On the borders of this ocean!”<br/>
When the ancient Wirokannas<br/>
Started out the ox to slaughter,<br/>
When Palwoinen swung his war-club,<br/>
Quick the victim turned his forehead,<br/>
Flashed his flaming eyes upon him;<br/>
To the fir-tree leaped the hero,<br/>
In the thicket hid Palwoinen,<br/>
Hid the gray-haired Wirokannas.<br/>
Everywhere they seek a butcher,<br/>
One to kill the ox of Suomi,<br/>
In the country of Karelen,<br/>
And among the Suomi-giants,<br/>
In the quiet fields of Ehstland,<br/>
On the battle-fields of Sweden,<br/>
Mid the mountaineers of Lapland,<br/>
In the magic fens of Turya;<br/>
Seek him in Tuoni’s empire,<br/>
In the death-courts of Manala.<br/>
Long the search, and unsuccessful,<br/>
On the blue back of the ocean,<br/>
On the far-outstretching pastures.<br/>
There arose from out the sea-waves,<br/>
Rose a hero from the waters,<br/>
On the white-capped, roaring breakers,<br/>
From the water’s broad expanses;<br/>
Nor belonged he to the largest,<br/>
Nor belonged he to the smallest;<br/>
Made his bed within a sea-shell,<br/>
Stood erect beneath a flour-sieve,<br/>
Hero old, with hands of iron,<br/>
And his face was copper-colored;<br/>
Quick the hero full unfolded,<br/>
Like the full corn from the kernel.<br/>
On his head a hat of flint-stone,<br/>
On his feet were sandstone-sandals,<br/>
In his hand a golden cleaver,<br/>
And the blade was copper-handled.<br/>
Thus at last they found a butcher,<br/>
Found the magic ox a slayer.<br/>
Nothing has been found so mighty<br/>
That it has not found a master.<br/>
As the sea-god saw his booty,<br/>
Quickly rushed he on his victim,<br/>
Hurled him to his knees before him,<br/>
Quickly felled the calf of Suomi,<br/>
Felled the young ox of Karelen.<br/>
Bountifully meat was furnished;<br/>
Filled at least a thousand hogsheads<br/>
Of his blood were seven boatfuls,<br/>
And a thousand weight of suet,<br/>
For the banquet of Pohyola,<br/>
For the marriage-feast of Northland.<br/>
In Pohyola was a guest-room,<br/>
Ample was the hall of Louhi,<br/>
Was in length a hundred furlongs,<br/>
And in breadth was nearly fifty;<br/>
When upon the roof a rooster<br/>
Crowed at break of early morning,<br/>
No one on the earth could hear him;<br/>
When the dog barked at one entrance,<br/>
None could hear him at the other.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Hastens to the hall and court-room,<br/>
In the centre speaks as follows:<br/>
“Whence indeed will come the liquor,<br/>
Who will brew me beer from barley,<br/>
Who will make the mead abundant,<br/>
For the people of the Northland,<br/>
Coming to my daughter’s marriage,<br/>
To her drinking-feast and nuptials?<br/>
Cannot comprehend the malting,<br/>
Never have I learned the secret,<br/>
Nor the origin of brewing.”<br/>
Spake an old man from his corner:<br/>
“Beer arises from the barley,<br/>
Comes from barley, hops, and water,<br/>
And the fire gives no assistance.<br/>
Hop-vine was the son of Remu,<br/>
Small the seed in earth was planted,<br/>
Cultivated in the loose soil,<br/>
Scattered like the evil serpents<br/>
On the brink of Kalew-waters,<br/>
On the Osmo-fields and borders.<br/>
There the young plant grew and flourished,<br/>
There arose the climbing hop-vine,<br/>
Clinging to the rocks and alders.<br/>
“Man of good-luck sowed the barley<br/>
On the Osmo hills and lowlands,<br/>
And the barley grew and flourished,<br/>
Grew and spread in rich abundance,<br/>
Fed upon the air and water,<br/>
On the Osmo plains and highlands,<br/>
On the fields of Kalew-heroes.<br/>
“Time had travelled little distance,<br/>
Ere the hops in trees were humming,<br/>
Barley in the fields was singing,<br/>
And from Kalew’s well the water,<br/>
This the language of the trio:<br/>
‘Let us join our triple forces,<br/>
Join to each the other’s powers;<br/>
Sad alone to live and struggle,<br/>
Little use in working singly,<br/>
Better we should toil together.’<br/>
“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,<br/>
Brewer of the drink refreshing,<br/>
Takes the golden grains of barley,<br/>
Taking six of barley-kernels,<br/>
Taking seven tips of hop-fruit,<br/>
Filling seven cups with water,<br/>
On the fire she sets the caldron,<br/>
Boils the barley, hops, and water,<br/>
Lets them steep, and seethe, and bubble<br/>
Brewing thus the beer delicious,<br/>
In the hottest days of summer,<br/>
On the foggy promontory,<br/>
On the island forest-covered;<br/>
Poured it into birch-wood barrels,<br/>
Into hogsheads made of oak-wood.<br/>
“Thus did Osmotar of Kalew<br/>
Brew together hops and barley,<br/>
Could not generate the ferment.<br/>
Thinking long and long debating,<br/>
Thus she spake in troubled accents:<br/>
‘What will bring the effervescence,<br/>
Who will add the needed factor,<br/>
That the beer may foam and sparkle,<br/>
May ferment and be delightful?’<br/>
Kalevatar, magic maiden,<br/>
Grace and beauty in her fingers,<br/>
Swiftly moving, lightly stepping,<br/>
In her trimly-buckled sandals,<br/>
Steps upon the birch-wood bottom,<br/>
Turns one way, and then another,<br/>
In the centre of the caldron;<br/>
Finds within a splinter lying<br/>
From the bottom lifts the fragment,<br/>
Turns it in her fingers, musing:<br/>
‘What may come of this I know not,<br/>
In the hands of magic maidens,<br/>
In the virgin hands of Kapo,<br/>
Snowy virgin of the Northland!’<br/>
“Kalevatar took the splinter<br/>
To the magic virgin, Kapo,<br/>
Who by unknown force and insight.<br/>
Rubbed her hands and knees together,<br/>
And produced a snow-white squirrel;<br/>
Thus instructed she her creature,<br/>
Gave the squirrel these directions:<br/>
‘Snow-white squirrel, mountain-jewel,<br/>
Flower of the field and forest,<br/>
Haste thee whither I would send thee,<br/>
Into Metsola’s wide limits,<br/>
Into Tapio’s seat of wisdom;<br/>
Hasten through the heavy tree-tops,<br/>
Wisely through the thickest branches,<br/>
That the eagle may not seize thee,<br/>
Thus escape the bird of heaven.<br/>
Bring me ripe cones from the fir-tree,<br/>
From the pine-tree bring me seedlings,<br/>
Bring them to the hands of Kapo,<br/>
For the beer of Osmo’s daughter.’<br/>
Quickly hastened forth the squirrel,<br/>
Quickly sped the nimble broad-tail,<br/>
Swiftly hopping on its journey<br/>
From one thicket to another,<br/>
From the birch-tree to the aspen,<br/>
From the pine-tree to the willow,<br/>
From the sorb-tree to the alder,<br/>
Jumping here and there with method,<br/>
Crossed the eagle-woods in safety,<br/>
Into Metsola’s wide limits,<br/>
Into Tapio’s seat of wisdom;<br/>
There perceived three magic pine-trees,<br/>
There perceived three smaller fir-trees,<br/>
Quickly climbed the dark-green branches,<br/>
Was not captured by the eagle,<br/>
Was not mangled in his talons;<br/>
Broke the young cones from the fir-tree,<br/>
Cut the shoots of pine-tree branches,<br/>
Hid the cones within his pouches,<br/>
Wrapped them in his fur-grown mittens<br/>
Brought them to the hands of Kapo,<br/>
To the magic virgin’s fingers.<br/>
Kapo took the cones selected,<br/>
Laid them in the beer for ferment,<br/>
But it brought no effervescence,<br/>
And the beer was cold and lifeless.<br/>
“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,<br/>
Kapo, brewer of the liquor,<br/>
Deeply thought and long considered:<br/>
‘What will bring the effervescence,<br/>
Who will lend me aid efficient,<br/>
That the beer may foam and sparkle,<br/>
May ferment and be refreshing?’<br/>
“Kalevatar, sparkling maiden,<br/>
Grace and beauty in her fingers,<br/>
Softly moving, lightly stepping,<br/>
In her trimly-buckled sandals,<br/>
Steps again upon the bottom,<br/>
Turns one way and then another,<br/>
In the centre of the caldron,<br/>
Sees a chip upon the bottom,<br/>
Takes it from its place of resting,<br/>
Looks upon the chip and muses<br/>
‘What may come of this I know not,<br/>
In the hands of mystic maidens,<br/>
In the hands of magic Kapo,<br/>
In the virgin’s snow-white fingers.’<br/>
“Kalevatar took the birch-chip<br/>
To the magic maiden, Kapo,<br/>
Gave it to the white-faced maiden.<br/>
Kapo, by the aid of magic,<br/>
Rubbed her hands and knees together,<br/>
And produced a magic marten,<br/>
And the marten, golden-breasted;<br/>
Thus instructed she her creature,<br/>
Gave the marten these directions.<br/>
‘Thou, my golden-breasted marten,<br/>
Thou my son of golden color,<br/>
Haste thou whither I may send thee,<br/>
To the bear-dens of the mountain,<br/>
To the grottoes of the growler,<br/>
Gather yeast upon thy fingers,<br/>
Gather foam from lips of anger,<br/>
From the lips of bears in battle,<br/>
Bring it to the hands of Kapo,<br/>
To the hands of Osmo’s daughter.’<br/>
“Then the marten golden-breasted,<br/>
Full consenting, hastened onward,<br/>
Quickly bounding on his journey,<br/>
Lightly leaping through the distance<br/>
Leaping o’er the widest rivers,<br/>
Leaping over rocky fissures,<br/>
To the bear-dens of the mountain,<br/>
To the grottoes of the growler,<br/>
Where the wild-bears fight each other,<br/>
Where they pass a dread existence,<br/>
Iron rocks, their softest pillows,<br/>
In the fastnesses of mountains;<br/>
From their lips the foam was dripping,<br/>
From their tongues the froth of anger;<br/>
This the marten deftly gathered,<br/>
Brought it to the maiden, Kapo,<br/>
Laid it in her dainty fingers.<br/>
“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,<br/>
Brewer of the beer of barley,<br/>
Used the beer-foam as a ferment;<br/>
But it brought no effervescence,<br/>
Did not make the liquor sparkle.<br/>
“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,<br/>
Thought again, and long debated:<br/>
‘Who or what will bring the ferment,<br/>
Th at my beer may not be lifeless?’<br/>
“Kalevatar, magic maiden,<br/>
Grace and beauty in her fingers,<br/>
Softly moving, lightly stepping,<br/>
In her trimly-buckled sandals,<br/>
Steps again upon the bottom,<br/>
Turns one way and then another,<br/>
In the centre of the caldron,<br/>
Sees a pod upon the bottom,<br/>
Lifts it in her snow-white fingers,<br/>
Turns it o’er and o’er, and muses:<br/>
‘What may come of this I know not,<br/>
In the hands of magic maidens,<br/>
In the hands of mystic Kapo,<br/>
In the snowy virgin’s fingers?’<br/>
“Kalevatar, sparkling maiden,<br/>
Gave the pod to magic Kapo;<br/>
Kapo, by the aid of magic,<br/>
Rubbed the pod upon her knee-cap,<br/>
And a honey-bee came flying<br/>
From the pod within her fingers,<br/>
Kapo thus addressed her birdling:<br/>
‘Little bee with honeyed winglets,<br/>
King of all the fragrant flowers,<br/>
Fly thou whither I direct thee,<br/>
To the islands in the ocean,<br/>
To the water-cliffs and grottoes,<br/>
Where asleep a maid has fallen,<br/>
Girdled with a belt of copper<br/>
By her side are honey-grasses,<br/>
By her lips are fragrant flowers,<br/>
Herbs and flowers honey-laden;<br/>
Gather there the sweetened juices,<br/>
Gather honey on thy winglets,<br/>
From the calyces of flowers,<br/>
From the tips of seven petals,<br/>
Bring it to the hands of Kapo,<br/>
To the hands of Osmo’s daughter.’<br/>
“Then the bee, the swift-winged birdling,<br/>
Flew away with lightning-swiftness<br/>
On his journey to the islands,<br/>
O’er the high waves of the ocean;<br/>
Journeyed one day, then a second,<br/>
Journeyed all the next day onward,<br/>
Till the third day evening brought him<br/>
To the islands in the ocean,<br/>
To the water-cliffs and grottoes;<br/>
Found the maiden sweetly sleeping,<br/>
In her silver-tinselled raiment,<br/>
Girdled with a belt of copper,<br/>
In a nameless meadow, sleeping,<br/>
In the honey-fields of magic;<br/>
By her side were honeyed grasses,<br/>
By her lips were fragrant flowers,<br/>
Silver stalks with golden petals;<br/>
Dipped its winglets in the honey,<br/>
Dipped its fingers in the juices<br/>
Of the sweetest of the flowers,<br/>
Brought the honey back to Kapo,<br/>
To the mystic maiden’s fingers.<br/>
“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,<br/>
Placed the honey in the liquor;<br/>
Kapo mixed the beer and honey,<br/>
And the wedding-beer fermented;<br/>
Rose the live beer upward, upward,<br/>
From the bottom of the vessels,<br/>
Upward in the tubs of birch-wood,<br/>
Foaming higher, higher, higher,<br/>
Till it touched the oaken handles,<br/>
Overflowing all the caldrons;<br/>
To the ground it foamed and sparkled,<br/>
Sank away in sand and gravel.<br/>
“Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
Scarce a moment had passed over,<br/>
Ere the heroes came in numbers<br/>
To the foaming beer of Northland,<br/>
Rushed to drink the sparkling liquor.<br/>
Ere all others Lemminkainen<br/>
Drank, and grew intoxicated<br/>
On the beer of Osmo’s daughter,<br/>
On the honey-drink of Kalew.<br/>
“Osmotar, the beer-preparer,<br/>
Kapo, brewer of the barley,<br/>
Spake these words in saddened accents:<br/>
‘Woe is me, my life hard-fated,<br/>
Badly have I brewed the liquor,<br/>
Have not brewed the beer in wisdom,<br/>
Will not live within its vessels,<br/>
Overflows and fills Pohyola!’<br/>
“From a tree-top sings the redbreast,<br/>
From the aspen calls the robin:<br/>
‘Do not grieve, thy beer is worthy,<br/>
Put it into oaken vessels,<br/>
Into strong and willing barrels<br/>
Firmly bound with hoops of copper.’<br/>
“Thus was brewed the beer or Northland,<br/>
At the hands of Osmo’s daughter;<br/>
This the origin of brewing<br/>
Beer from Kalew-hops and barley;<br/>
Great indeed the reputation<br/>
Of the ancient beer of Kalew,<br/>
Said to make the feeble hardy,<br/>
Famed to dry the tears of women,<br/>
Famed to cheer the broken-hearted,<br/>
Make the aged young and supple,<br/>
Make the timid brave and mighty,<br/>
Make the brave men ever braver,<br/>
Fill the heart with joy and gladness,<br/>
Fill the mind with wisdom-sayings,<br/>
Fill the tongue with ancient legends,<br/>
Only makes the fool more foolish.”<br/>
When the hostess of Pohyola<br/>
Heard how beer was first fermented,<br/>
Heard the origin of brewing,<br/>
Straightway did she fill with water<br/>
Many oaken tubs and barrels;<br/>
Filled but half the largest vessels,<br/>
Mixed the barley with the water,<br/>
Added also hops abundant;<br/>
Well she mixed the triple forces<br/>
In her tubs of oak and birch-wood,<br/>
Heated stones for months succeeding,<br/>
Thus to boil the magic mixture,<br/>
Steeped it through the days of summer,<br/>
Burned the wood of many forests,<br/>
Emptied all the, springs of Pohya;<br/>
Daily did the, forests lesson,<br/>
And the wells gave up their waters,<br/>
Thus to aid the hostess, Louhi,<br/>
In the brewing of the liquors,<br/>
From the water, hops, and barley,<br/>
And from honey of the islands,<br/>
For the wedding-feast of Northland,<br/>
For Pohyola’s great carousal<br/>
And rejoicings at the marriage<br/>
Of the Malden of the Rainbow<br/>
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Metal-worker of Wainola.<br/>
Smoke is seen upon the island,<br/>
Fire, upon the promontory,<br/>
Black smoke rising to the heavens<br/>
From the fire upon the island;<br/>
Fills with clouds the half of Pohya,<br/>
Fills Karelen’s many hamlets;<br/>
All the people look and wonder,<br/>
This the chorus of the women:<br/>
“Whence are rising all these smoke-clouds,<br/>
Why this dreadful fire in Northland?<br/>
Is not like the smoke of camp-fires,<br/>
Is too large for fires of shepherds!”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s ancient mother<br/>
Journeyed in the early morning<br/>
For some water to the fountain,<br/>
Saw the smoke arise to heaven,<br/>
In the region of Pohyola,<br/>
These the words the mother uttered:<br/>
“’Tis the smoke of battle-heroes,<br/>
From the beat of warring armies!”<br/>
Even Ahti, island-hero,<br/>
Ancient wizard, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Also known as Kaukomieli,<br/>
Looked upon the scene in wonder,<br/>
Thought awhile and spake as follows:<br/>
“I would like to see this nearer,<br/>
Learn the cause of all this trouble,<br/>
Whence this smoke and great confusion,<br/>
Whether smoke from heat of battle,<br/>
Or the bonfires of the shepherds.”<br/>
Kaukomieli gazed and pondered,<br/>
Studied long the rising smoke-clouds;<br/>
Came not from the heat of battle,<br/>
Came not from the shepherd bonfires;<br/>
Heard they were the fires of Louhi<br/>
Brewing beer in Sariola,<br/>
On Pohyola’s promontory;<br/>
Long and oft looked Lemminkainen,<br/>
Strained in eagerness his vision,<br/>
Stared, and peered, and thought, and wondered,<br/>
Looked abashed and envy-swollen,<br/>
“O beloved, second mother,<br/>
Northland’s well-intentioned hostess,<br/>
Brew thy beer of honey-flavor,<br/>
Make thy liquors foam and sparkle,<br/>
For thy many friends invited,<br/>
Brew it well for Lemminkainen,<br/>
For his marriage in Pohyola<br/>
With the Maiden of the Rainbow.”<br/>
Finally the beer was ready,<br/>
Beverage of noble heroes,<br/>
Stored away in casks and barrels,<br/>
There to rest awhile in silence,<br/>
In the cellars of the Northland,<br/>
In the copper-banded vessels,<br/>
In the magic oaken hogsheads,<br/>
Plugs and faucets made of copper.<br/>
Then the hostess of Pohyola<br/>
Skilfully prepared the dishes,<br/>
Laid them all with careful fingers<br/>
In the boiling-pans and kettles,<br/>
Ordered countless loaves of barley,<br/>
Ordered many liquid dishes,<br/>
All the delicacies of Northland,<br/>
For the feasting of her people,<br/>
For their richest entertainment,<br/>
For the nuptial songs and dances,<br/>
At the marriage of her daughter<br/>
With the blacksmith, Ilmarinen.<br/>
When the loaves were baked and ready.<br/>
When the dishes all were seasoned,<br/>
Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
Scarce a moment had passed over,<br/>
Ere the beer, in casks imprisoned,<br/>
Loudly rapped, and sang, and murmured:<br/>
“Come, ye heroes, come and take me,<br/>
Come and let me cheer your spirits,<br/>
Make you sing the songs of wisdom,<br/>
That with honor ye may praise me,<br/>
Sing the songs of beer immortal!”<br/>
Straightway Louhi sought a minstrel,<br/>
Magic bard and artist-singer,<br/>
That the beer might well be lauded,<br/>
Might be praised in song and honor.<br/>
First as bard they brought a salmon,<br/>
Also brought a pike from ocean,<br/>
But the salmon had no talent,<br/>
And the pike had little wisdom;<br/>
Teeth of pike and gills of salmon<br/>
Were not made for singing legends.<br/>
Then again they sought a singer,<br/>
Magic minstrel, beer-enchanter,<br/>
Thus to praise the drink of heroes,<br/>
Sing the songs of joy and gladness;<br/>
And a boy was brought for singing;<br/>
But the boy had little knowledge,<br/>
Could not praise the beer in honor;<br/>
Children’s tongues are filled with questions,<br/>
Children cannot speak in wisdom,<br/>
Cannot sing the ancient legends.<br/>
Stronger grew the beer imprisoned<br/>
In the copper-banded vessels,<br/>
Locked behind the copper faucets,<br/>
Boiled, and foamed, and sang, and murmured:<br/>
“If ye do not bring a singer,<br/>
That will sing my worth immortal,<br/>
That will sing my praise deserving,<br/>
I will burst these bands of copper,<br/>
Burst the heads of all these barrels;<br/>
Will not serve the best of heroes<br/>
Till he sings my many virtues.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Called a trusted maiden-servant,<br/>
Sent her to invite the people<br/>
To the marriage of her daughter,<br/>
These the words that Louhi uttered:<br/>
“O my trusted, truthful maiden,<br/>
Servant-maid to me belonging,<br/>
Call together all my people,<br/>
Call the heroes to my banquet,<br/>
Ask the rich, and ask the needy,<br/>
Ask the blind and deaf, and crippled,<br/>
Ask the young, and ask the aged;<br/>
Go thou to the hills, and hedges,<br/>
To the highways, and the by-ways,<br/>
Urge them to my daughter’s wedding;<br/>
Bring the blind, and sorely troubled,<br/>
In my boats upon the waters,<br/>
In my sledges bring the halting,<br/>
With the old, and sick, and needy;<br/>
Ask the whole of Sariola,<br/>
Ask the people of Karelen,<br/>
Ask the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Famous bard and wisdom-singer;<br/>
But I give command explicit<br/>
Not to ask wild Lemminkainen,<br/>
Not the island-dweller, Ahti!”<br/>
This the question of the servant:<br/>
“Why not ask wild Lemminkainen,<br/>
Ancient islander and minstrel?”<br/>
Louhi gave this simple answer:<br/>
“Good the reasons that I give thee<br/>
Why the wizard, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Must not have an invitation<br/>
To my daughter’s feast and marriage<br/>
Ahti courts the heat of battle,<br/>
Lemminkainen fosters trouble,<br/>
Skilful fighter of the virtues;<br/>
Evil thinking, acting evil,<br/>
He would bring but pain and sorrow,<br/>
He would jest and jeer at maidens<br/>
In their trimly buckled raiment,<br/>
Cannot ask the evil-minded!”<br/>
Thus again the servant questions:<br/>
“Tell me how to know this Ahti,<br/>
Also known as Lemminkainen,<br/>
That I may not ask him hither;<br/>
Do not know the isle of Ahti,<br/>
Nor the home of Kaukomieli<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Easy ’tis to know the wizard,<br/>
Easy find the Ahti-dwelling:<br/>
Ahti lives on yonder island,<br/>
On that point dwells Lemminkainen,<br/>
In his mansion near the water,<br/>
Far at sea his home and dwelling.”<br/>
Thereupon the trusted maiden<br/>
Spread the wedding-invitations<br/>
To the people of Pohyola,<br/>
To the tribes of Kalevala;<br/>
Asked the friendless, asked the homeless<br/>
Asked the laborers and shepherds,<br/>
Asked the fishermen and hunters,<br/>
Asked the deaf, the dumb, the crippled,<br/>
Asked the young, and asked the aged,<br/>
Asked the rich, and asked the needy;<br/>
Did not give an invitation<br/>
To the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Island-dweller of the ocean.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap21"/>RUNE XXI.<br/>
ILMARINEN’S WEDDING-FEAST.</h2>
<p>Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Ancient dame of Sariola,<br/>
While at work within her dwelling,<br/>
Heard the whips crack on the fenlands,<br/>
Heard the rattle of the sledges;<br/>
To the northward turned her glances,<br/>
Turned her vision to the sunlight,<br/>
And her thoughts ran on as follow:<br/>
“Who are these in bright apparel,<br/>
On the banks of Pohya-waters,<br/>
Are they friends or hostile armies?”<br/>
Then the hostess of the Northland<br/>
Looked again and well considered,<br/>
Drew much nearer to examine,<br/>
Found they were not hostile armies,<br/>
Found that they were friends and suitors.<br/>
In the midst was Ilmarinen,<br/>
Son-in-law to ancient Louhi.<br/>
When the hostess of Pohyola<br/>
Saw the son-in-law approaching<br/>
She addressed the words that follow:<br/>
“I had thought the winds were raging,<br/>
That the piles of wood were falling,<br/>
Thought the pebbles in commotion,<br/>
Or perchance the ocean roaring;<br/>
Then I hastened nearer, nearer,<br/>
Drew still nearer and examined,<br/>
Found the winds were not in battle,<br/>
Found the piles of wood unshaken,<br/>
Found the ocean was not roaring,<br/>
Nor the pebbles in commotion,<br/>
Found my son-in-law was coming<br/>
With his heroes and attendants,<br/>
Heroes counted by the hundreds.<br/>
“Should you ask of me the question,<br/>
How I recognized the bridegroom<br/>
Mid the hosts of men and heroes,<br/>
I should answer, I should tell you:<br/>
‘As the hazel-bush in copses,<br/>
As the oak-tree in the forest,<br/>
As the Moon among the planets;<br/>
Drives the groom a coal-black courser,<br/>
Running like the famished black-dog,<br/>
Flying like the hungry raven,<br/>
Graceful as the lark at morning,<br/>
Golden cuckoos, six in number,<br/>
Twitter on the birchen cross-bow;<br/>
There are seven bluebirds singing<br/>
On the racer’s hame and collar.”<br/>
Noises hear they in the court-yard,<br/>
On the highway hear the sledges,<br/>
To the court comes Ilmarinen,<br/>
With his body-guard of heroes;<br/>
In the midst the chosen suitor,<br/>
Not too far in front of others,<br/>
Not too far behind his fellows.<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Hie ye hither, men and heroes,<br/>
Haste, ye watchers, to the stables,<br/>
There unhitch the suitor’s stallion,<br/>
Lower well the racer’s breast-plate,<br/>
There undo the straps and buckles,<br/>
Loosen well the shafts and traces,<br/>
And conduct the suitor hither,<br/>
Give my son-in-law good welcome!”<br/>
Ilmarinen turned his racer<br/>
Into Louhi’s yard and stables,<br/>
And descended from his snow-sledge.<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Come, thou servant of my bidding,<br/>
Best of all my trusted servants,<br/>
Take at once the bridegroom’s courser<br/>
From the shafts adorned with silver,<br/>
From the curving arch of willow,<br/>
Lift the harness trimmed in copper,<br/>
Tie the white-face to the manger,<br/>
Treat the suitor’s steed with kindness,<br/>
Lead him carefully to shelter<br/>
By his soft and shining bridle,<br/>
By his halter tipped with silver;<br/>
Let him roll among the sand-hills,<br/>
On the bottoms soft and even,<br/>
On the borders of the snow-banks,<br/>
In the fields of milky color.<br/>
“Lead the hero’s steed to water,<br/>
Lead him to the Pohya-fountains,<br/>
Where the living streams are flowing,<br/>
Sweet as milk of human kindness,<br/>
From the roots of silvery birches,<br/>
Underneath the shade of aspens.<br/>
“Feed the courser of the suitor,<br/>
On the sweetest corn and barley,<br/>
On the summer-wheat and clover,<br/>
In the caldron steeped in sweetness;<br/>
Feed him at the golden manger,<br/>
In the boxes lined with copper,<br/>
At my manger richly furnished,<br/>
In the warmest of the stables;<br/>
Tie him with a silk-like halter,<br/>
To the golden rings and staples,<br/>
To the hooks of purest silver,<br/>
Set in beams of birch and oak-wood;<br/>
Feed him on the hay the sweetest,<br/>
Feed him on the corn nutritious,<br/>
Give the best my barns can furnish.<br/>
“Curry well the suitor’s courser<br/>
With the curry-comb of fish-bone,<br/>
Brush his hair with silken brushes,<br/>
Put his mane and tail in order,<br/>
Cover well with flannel blankets,<br/>
Blankets wrought in gold and silver,<br/>
Buckles forged from shining copper.<br/>
“Come, ye small lads of the village,<br/>
Lead the suitor to my chambers,<br/>
With your auburn locks uncovered,<br/>
From your hands remove your mittens,<br/>
See if ye can lead the hero<br/>
Through the door without his stooping,<br/>
Lifting not the upper cross-bar,<br/>
Lowering not the oaken threshold,<br/>
Moving not the birchen casings,<br/>
Great the hero who must enter.<br/>
“Ilmarinen is too stately,<br/>
Cannot enter through the portals,<br/>
Not the son-in-law and bridegroom,<br/>
Till the portals have been heightened;<br/>
Taller by a head the suitor<br/>
Than the door-ways of the mansion.”<br/>
Quick the servants of Pohyola<br/>
Tore away the upper cross-bar,<br/>
That his cap might not be lifted;<br/>
Made the oaken threshold lower<br/>
That the hero might not stumble;<br/>
Made the birch-wood portals wider,<br/>
Opened full the door of welcome,<br/>
Easy entrance for the suitor.<br/>
Speaks the hostess of the Northland<br/>
As the bridegroom freely passes<br/>
Through the doorway of her dwelling:<br/>
“Thanks are due to thee, O Ukko,<br/>
That my son-in-law has entered!<br/>
Let me now my halls examine;<br/>
Make the bridal chambers ready,<br/>
Finest linen on my tables,<br/>
Softest furs upon my benches,<br/>
Birchen flooring scrubbed to whiteness,<br/>
All my rooms in perfect order.”<br/>
Then the hostess of Pohyola<br/>
Visited her spacious dwelling,<br/>
Did not recognize her chambers;<br/>
Every room had been remodeled,<br/>
Changed by force of mighty magic;<br/>
All the halls were newly burnished,<br/>
Hedge-hog bones were used for ceilings,<br/>
Bones of reindeer for foundations,<br/>
Bones of wolverine for door-sills,<br/>
For the cross-bars bones of roebuck,<br/>
Apple-wood were all the rafters,<br/>
Alder-wood, the window-casings,<br/>
Scales of trout adorned the windows,<br/>
And the fires were set in flowers.<br/>
All the seats were made of silver,<br/>
All the floors of copper-tiling,<br/>
Gold-adorned were all the tables,<br/>
On the floor were silken mattings,<br/>
Every fire-place set in copper,<br/>
Every hearth-stone cut from marble,<br/>
On each shelf were colored sea-shells,<br/>
Kalew’s tree was their protection.<br/>
To the court-room came the hero,<br/>
Chosen suitor from Wainola,<br/>
These the words of Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Send, O Ukko, health and pleasure<br/>
To this ancient home and dwelling,<br/>
To this mansion richly fashioned!”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Let thy coming be auspicious<br/>
To these halls of thee unworthy,<br/>
To the home of thine affianced,<br/>
To this dwelling lowly fashioned,<br/>
Mid the lindens and the aspens.<br/>
“Come, ye maidens that should serve me,<br/>
Come, ye fellows from the village,<br/>
Bring me fire upon the birch-bark,<br/>
Light the fagots of the fir-tree,<br/>
That I may behold the bridegroom,<br/>
Chosen suitor of my daughter,<br/>
Fairy Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
See the color of his eyeballs,<br/>
Whether they are blue or sable,<br/>
See if they are warm and faithful.”<br/>
Quick the young lads from the village<br/>
Brought the fire upon the birch-bark,<br/>
Brought it on the tips of pine-wood;<br/>
And the fire and smoke commingled<br/>
Roll and roar about the hero,<br/>
Blackening the suitor’s visage,<br/>
And the hostess speaks as follows;<br/>
“Bring the fire upon a taper,<br/>
On the waxen tapers bring it!”<br/>
Then the maidens did as bidden,<br/>
Quickly brought the lighted tapers,<br/>
Made the suitor’s eyeballs glisten,<br/>
Made his cheeks look fresh and ruddy;<br/>
Made his eyes of sable color<br/>
Sparkle like the foam of waters,<br/>
Like the reed-grass on the margin,<br/>
Colored as the ocean jewels,<br/>
Iridescent as the rainbow.<br/>
“Come, ye fellows of the hamlet,<br/>
Lead my son-in-law and hero<br/>
To the highest seat at table,<br/>
To the seat of greatest honor,<br/>
With his back upon the blue-wall,<br/>
Looking on my bounteous tables,<br/>
Facing all the guests of Northland.”<br/>
Then the hostess of Pohyola<br/>
Served her guests in great abundance,<br/>
Richest drinks and rarest viands,<br/>
First of all she, served the bridegroom<br/>
On his platters, honeyed biscuit,<br/>
And the sweetest river salmon,<br/>
Seasoned butter, roasted bacon,<br/>
All the dainties of Pohyola.<br/>
Then the helpers served the others,<br/>
Filled the plates of all invited<br/>
With the varied food of Northland.<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola:<br/>
“Come, ye maidens from the village,<br/>
Hither bring the beer in pitchers,<br/>
In the urns with double handles,<br/>
To the many guests in-gathered,<br/>
Ere all others, serve the bridegroom.”<br/>
Thereupon the merry maidens<br/>
Brought the beer in silver pitchers<br/>
From the copper-banded vessels,<br/>
For the wedding-guests assembled;<br/>
And the beer, fermenting, sparkled<br/>
On the beard of Ilmarinen,<br/>
On the beards of many heroes.<br/>
When the guests had all partaken<br/>
Of the wondrous beer of barley,<br/>
Spake the beer in merry accents<br/>
Through the tongues of the magicians,<br/>
Through the tongue of many a hero,<br/>
Through the tongue of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Famed to be the sweetest singer<br/>
Of the Northland bards and minstrels,<br/>
These the words of the enchanter:<br/>
“O thou beer of honeyed flavor,<br/>
Let us not imbibe in silence,<br/>
Let some hero sing thy praises,<br/>
Sing thy worth in golden measures;<br/>
Let the hostess start the singing,<br/>
Let the bridegroom sound thy virtues!<br/>
Have our songs thus quickly vanished,<br/>
Have our joyful tongues grown silent?<br/>
Evil then has been the brewing,<br/>
Then the beer must be unworthy,<br/>
That it does not cheer the singer,<br/>
Does not move the merry minstrel,<br/>
That the golden guests are joyless,<br/>
And the cuckoo is not singing.<br/>
Never will these benches echo<br/>
Till the bench-guests chant thy virtues;<br/>
Nor the floor resound thy praises<br/>
Till the floor-guests sing in concord;<br/>
Nor the windows join the chorus<br/>
Till the window-guests have spoken;<br/>
All the tables will keep silence<br/>
Till the heroes toast thy virtues;<br/>
Little singing from the chimney<br/>
Till the chimney-guests have chanted.”<br/>
On the floor a child was sitting,<br/>
Thus the little boy made answer:<br/>
“I am small and young in singing,<br/>
Have perchance but little wisdom;<br/>
Be that as it may, my seniors,<br/>
Since the elder minstrels sing not,<br/>
Nor the heroes chant their legends,<br/>
Nor the hostess lead the singing,<br/>
I will sing my simple stories,<br/>
Sing my little store of knowledge,<br/>
To the pleasure of the evening,<br/>
To the joy of the invited.”<br/>
Near the fire reclined an old man,<br/>
And the gray-beard thus made answer:<br/>
“Not the time for children’s singing,<br/>
Children’s wisdom is too ready,<br/>
Children’s songs are filled with trifles,<br/>
Filled with shrewd and vain deceptions,<br/>
Maiden-songs are full of follies;<br/>
Leave the songs and incantations<br/>
To the ancient wizard-singers;<br/>
Leave the tales of times primeval<br/>
To the minstrel of Wainola,<br/>
To the hero of the Northland,<br/>
To the, ancient Wainamoinen.”<br/>
Thereupon Osmoinen answered:<br/>
“Are there not some sweeter singers<br/>
In this honored congregation,<br/>
That will clasp their hands together,<br/>
Sing the ancient songs unbroken,<br/>
Thus begin the incantations,<br/>
Make these ancient halls re-echo<br/>
For the pleasure of the evening,<br/>
For the joy of the in-gathered?”<br/>
From the hearth-stone spake, the gray-beard<br/>
“Not a singer of Pohyola,<br/>
Not a minstrel, nor magician,<br/>
That was better skilled in chanting<br/>
Legends of the days departed,<br/>
Than was I when I was singing,<br/>
In my years of vain ambition;<br/>
Then I chanted tales of heroes,<br/>
On the blue back of the waters,<br/>
Sang the ballads of my people,<br/>
In the vales and on the mountains,<br/>
Through the verdant fields and forests;<br/>
Sweet my voice and skilled my singing,<br/>
All my songs were highly lauded,<br/>
Rippled like the quiet rivers,<br/>
Easy-flowing like the waters,<br/>
Easy-gliding as the snow-shoes,<br/>
Like the ship upon the ocean.<br/>
“Woe is me, my days are ended,<br/>
Would not recognize my singing,<br/>
All its sweetness gone to others,<br/>
Flows no more like rippling waters,<br/>
Makes no more the hills re-echo!<br/>
Now my songs are full of discord,<br/>
Like the rake upon the stubble,<br/>
Like the sledge upon the gravel,<br/>
Like the boat upon the sea-shore!”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Spake these words in magic measures:<br/>
“Since no other bard appeareth<br/>
That will clasp my hand in singing,<br/>
I will sing some simple legends,<br/>
Sing my, garnered store of wisdom,<br/>
Make these magic halls re-echo<br/>
With my tales of ancient story,<br/>
Since a bard I was created,<br/>
Born an orator and singer;<br/>
Do not ask the ways of others,<br/>
Follow not the paths of strangers.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, famous minstrel,<br/>
Song’s eternal, wise supporter,<br/>
Then began the songs of pleasure,<br/>
Made the halls resound with joyance,<br/>
Filled the rooms with wondrous singing;<br/>
Sang the ancient bard-magician<br/>
All the oldest wisdom-sayings,<br/>
Did not fail in voice nor legends,<br/>
All the wisest thoughts remembered.<br/>
Thus the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Sang the joy of all assembled,<br/>
To the pleasure of the evening,<br/>
To the merriment of maidens,<br/>
To the happiness of heroes;<br/>
All the guests were stilled in wonder<br/>
At the magic of his singing,<br/>
At the songs of the magician.<br/>
Spake again wise Wainamoinen,<br/>
When his wonder-tales had ended:<br/>
“l have little worth or power,<br/>
Am a bard of little value,<br/>
Little consequence my singing,<br/>
Mine abilities as nothing,<br/>
If but Ukko, my Creator,<br/>
Should intone his wisdom-sayings,<br/>
Sing the source of good and evil,<br/>
Sing the origin of matter,<br/>
Sing the legends of omniscience,<br/>
Sing his songs in full perfection.<br/>
God could sing the floods to honey,<br/>
Sing the sands to ruddy berries,<br/>
Sing the pebbles into barley,<br/>
Sing to beer the running waters,<br/>
Sing to salt the rocks of ocean,<br/>
Into corn-fields sing the forests,<br/>
Into gold the forest-fruitage,<br/>
Sing to bread the hills and mountains,<br/>
Sing to eggs the rounded sandstones;<br/>
He could touch the springs of magic,<br/>
He could turn the keys of nature,<br/>
And produce within thy pastures,<br/>
Hurdles filled with sheep and reindeer,<br/>
Stables filled with fleet-foot stallions,<br/>
Kine in every field and fallow;<br/>
Sing a fur-robe for the bridegroom,<br/>
For the bride a coat of ermine,<br/>
For the hostess, shoes of silver,<br/>
For the hero, mail of copper.<br/>
“Grant O Ukko, my Creator,<br/>
God of love, and truth, and justice,<br/>
Grant thy blessing on our feasting,<br/>
Bless this company assembled,<br/>
For the good of Sariola,<br/>
For the happiness of Northland!<br/>
May this bread and beer bring joyance,<br/>
May they come in rich abundance,<br/>
May they carry full contentment<br/>
To the people of Pohyola,<br/>
To the cabin and the mansion;<br/>
May the hours we spend in singing,<br/>
In the morning, in the evening,<br/>
Fill our hearts with joy and gladness!<br/>
Hear us in our supplications,<br/>
Grant to us thy needed blessings,<br/>
Send enjoyment, health, and comfort,<br/>
To the people here assembled,<br/>
To the host and to the hostess,<br/>
To the bride and to the bridegroom,<br/>
To the sons upon the waters,<br/>
To the daughters at their weavings,<br/>
To the hunters on the mountains,<br/>
To the shepherds in the fenlands,<br/>
That our lives may end in honor,<br/>
That we may recall with pleasure<br/>
Ilmarinen’s magic marriage<br/>
To the Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Snow-white virgin of the Northland.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap22"/>RUNE XXII.<br/>
THE BRIDE S FAREWELL.</h2>
<p>When the marriage was completed,<br/>
When the many guests had feasted,<br/>
At the wedding of the Northland,<br/>
At the Dismal-land carousal,<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola<br/>
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Wherefore, bridegroom, dost thou linger,<br/>
Why art waiting, Northland hero?<br/>
Sittest for the father’s pleasure,<br/>
For affection of the mother,<br/>
For the splendor of the maidens,<br/>
For the beauty of the daughter?<br/>
Noble son-in-law and brother,<br/>
Wait thou longer, having waited<br/>
Long already for the virgin,<br/>
Thine affianced is not ready,<br/>
Not prepared, thy life-companion,<br/>
Only are her tresses braided.<br/>
“Chosen bridegroom, pride of Pohya,<br/>
Wait thou longer, having waited<br/>
Long already for the virgin,<br/>
Thy beloved is preparing,<br/>
Only is one hand made ready.<br/>
“Famous artist, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Wait still longer, having waited<br/>
Long already for the virgin,<br/>
Thy beloved is not ready,<br/>
Only is one foot in fur-shoes,”<br/>
Spake again the ancient Louhi:<br/>
“Chosen suitor of my daughter,<br/>
Thou hast thrice in kindness waited,<br/>
Wait no longer for the virgin,<br/>
Thy beloved now is ready,<br/>
Well prepared thy life-companion,<br/>
Fairy Maiden of the Rainbow.<br/>
“Beauteous daughter, join thy suitor,<br/>
Follow him, thy chosen husband,<br/>
Very near is the uniting,<br/>
Near indeed thy separation.<br/>
At thy hand the honored bridegroom,<br/>
Near the door he waits to lead thee,<br/>
Guide thee to his home and kindred;<br/>
At the gate his steed is waiting,<br/>
Restless champs his silver bridle,<br/>
And the sledge awaits thy presence.<br/>
“Thou wert anxious for a suitor,<br/>
Ready to accept his offer,<br/>
Wert in haste to take his jewels,<br/>
Place his rings upon thy fingers;<br/>
Now, fair daughter, keep thy promise;<br/>
To his sledge, with happy footsteps,<br/>
Hie in haste to join the bridegroom,<br/>
Gaily journey to the village<br/>
With thy chosen life-companion,<br/>
With thy suitor, Ilmarinen.<br/>
Little hast thou looked about thee,<br/>
Hast not raised thine eyes above thee,<br/>
Beauteous maiden of the Northland,<br/>
Hast thou made a rueful bargain,<br/>
Full of wailing thine engagement,<br/>
And thy marriage full of sorrow,<br/>
That thy father’s ancient cottage<br/>
Thou art leaving now forever,<br/>
Leaving also friends and kindred,<br/>
For the, blacksmith, Ilmarinen?<br/>
“O how beautiful thy childhood,<br/>
In thy father’s dwelling-places,<br/>
Nurtured like a tender flower,<br/>
Like the strawberry in spring-time<br/>
Soft thy couch and sweet thy slumber,<br/>
Warm thy fires and rich thy table;<br/>
From the fields came corn in plenty,<br/>
From the highlands, milk and berries,<br/>
Wheat and barley in abundance,<br/>
Fish, and fowl, and hare, and bacon,<br/>
From thy father’s fields and forests.<br/>
“Never wert thou, child, in sorrow,<br/>
Never hadst thou grief nor trouble,<br/>
All thy cares were left to fir-trees,<br/>
All thy worry to the copses,<br/>
All thy weeping to the willows,<br/>
All thy sighing to the lindens,<br/>
All thy thinking to the aspens<br/>
And the birches on the mountains,<br/>
Light and airy as the leaflet,<br/>
As a butterfly in summer,<br/>
Ruddy as a mountain-berry,<br/>
Beautiful as vernal flowers.<br/>
“Now thou leavest home and kindred,<br/>
Wanderest to other firesides,<br/>
Goest to another mother,<br/>
Other sisters, other brothers,<br/>
Goest to a second father,<br/>
To the servant-folk of strangers,<br/>
From thy native hills and lowlands.<br/>
There and here the homes will differ,<br/>
Happier thy mother’s hearth-stone;<br/>
Other horns will there be sounded,<br/>
Other portals there swing open,<br/>
Other hinges there be creaking;<br/>
There the doors thou canst not enter<br/>
Like the daughters of Wainola,<br/>
Canst not tend the fires and ovens<br/>
As will please the minds of strangers.<br/>
“Didst thou think, my fairest maiden,<br/>
Thou couldst wed and on the morrow<br/>
Couldst return, if thou shouldst wish it,<br/>
To thy father’s court and dwelling?<br/>
Not for one, nor two, nor three days,<br/>
Wilt thou leave thy mother’s chambers,<br/>
Leave thy sisters and thy brothers,<br/>
Leave thy father’s hills and lowlands.<br/>
Long the time the wife must wander,<br/>
Many months and years must wander,<br/>
Work, and struggle, all her life long,<br/>
Even though the mother liveth.<br/>
Great, indeed, must be the changes<br/>
When thou comest back to Pohya,<br/>
Changed, thy friends and nearest kindred,<br/>
Changed, thy father’s ancient dwellings,<br/>
Changed, the valleys and the mountains,<br/>
Other birds will sing thy praises!”<br/>
When the mother thus had spoken,<br/>
Then the daughter spake, departing:<br/>
“In my early days of childhood<br/>
Often I intoned these measures:<br/>
‘Art a virgin, yet no virgin,<br/>
Guided by an aged mother,<br/>
In a brother’s fields and forests,<br/>
In the mansion of a father!<br/>
Only wilt become a virgin,<br/>
Only when thou hast a suitor,<br/>
Only when thou wedst a hero,<br/>
One foot on the father’s threshold,<br/>
And the other for the snow-sledge<br/>
That will speed thee and thy husband<br/>
To his native vales and highlands!’<br/>
“I have wished thus many summers,<br/>
Sang it often in my childhood,<br/>
Hoped for this as for the flowers,<br/>
Welcome as the birds of spring-time.<br/>
Thus fulfilled are all my wishes,<br/>
Very near is my departure,<br/>
One foot on my father’s threshold,<br/>
And the, other for the journey<br/>
With my husband to his people;<br/>
Cannot understand the reason<br/>
That has changed my former feelings,<br/>
Cannot leave thee now with gladness,<br/>
Cannot go with great rejoicing<br/>
From my dear, old home and kindred,<br/>
Where as maiden I have lingered,<br/>
From the courts where I was nurtured,<br/>
From my father’s band and guidance,<br/>
From my faithful mother’s counsel.<br/>
Now I go, a maid of sorrow,<br/>
Heavy-hearted to the bridegroom,<br/>
Like the bride of Night in winter,<br/>
Like the ice upon the rivers.<br/>
“Such is not the mind of others,<br/>
Other brides of Northland heroes;<br/>
Others do not leave unhappy,<br/>
Have no tears, nor cares, nor sorrows,<br/>
I alas! must weep and murmur,<br/>
Carry to my grave great sadness,<br/>
Heart as dark as Death’s black river.<br/>
“Such the feelings of the happy,<br/>
Such the minds of merry maidens:<br/>
Like the early dawn of spring-time,<br/>
Like the rising Sun in summer<br/>
No such radiance awaits me,<br/>
With my young heart filled with terror;<br/>
Happiness is not my portion,<br/>
Like the flat-shore of the ocean,<br/>
Like the dark rift of the storm-cloud,<br/>
Like the cheerless nights of winter!<br/>
Dreary is the day in autumn,<br/>
Dreary too the autumn evening,<br/>
Still more dreary is my future!”<br/>
An industrious old maiden,<br/>
Ever guarding home and kindred,<br/>
Spake these words of doubtful comfort:<br/>
“Dost thou, beauteous bride, remember,<br/>
Canst thou not recall my counsels?<br/>
These the words that I have taught thee:<br/>
‘Look not joyfully for suitors,<br/>
Never heed the tongues of wooers,<br/>
Look not in the eyes of charmers,<br/>
At their feet let fall thy vision.<br/>
He that hath a mouth for sweetness,<br/>
He that hath an eye for beauty,<br/>
Offers little that will comfort;<br/>
Lempo sits upon his forehead,<br/>
In his mouth dwells dire Tuoni.’<br/>
“Thus, fair bride, did I advise thee,<br/>
Thus advised my sister’s daughter:<br/>
Should there come the best of suitors,<br/>
Noblest wooers, proudest lovers,<br/>
Give to all these wisdom-sayings,<br/>
Let thine answer be as follows:<br/>
‘Never will I think it wisdom,<br/>
Never will it be my pleasure,<br/>
To become a second daughter,<br/>
Linger with my husband’s mother;<br/>
Never shall I leave my father,<br/>
Never wander forth to bondage,<br/>
At the bidding of a bridegroom:<br/>
Never shall I be a servant,<br/>
Wife and slave to any hero,<br/>
Never will I be submissive<br/>
To the orders of a husband.’<br/>
“Fairest bride, thou didst not heed me,<br/>
Gav’st no thought to my advices,<br/>
Didst not listen to my counsel;<br/>
Wittingly thy feet have wandered<br/>
Into boiling tar and water,<br/>
Hastened to thy suitor’s snow-sledge,<br/>
To the bear-dens of thy husband,<br/>
On his sledge to be ill-treated,<br/>
Carried to his native country,<br/>
To the bondage of his people,<br/>
There, a subject to his mother.<br/>
Thou hast left thy mother’s dwelling,<br/>
To the schooling of the master;<br/>
Hard indeed the master’s teachings,<br/>
Little else than constant torture;<br/>
Ready for thee are his bridles,<br/>
Ready for thy bands the shackles,<br/>
Were not forged for any other;<br/>
Soon, indeed, thou’lt feel the hardness,<br/>
Feel the weight of thy misfortune,<br/>
Feel thy second father’s censure,<br/>
And his wife’s inhuman treatment,<br/>
Hear the cold words or thy brother,<br/>
Quail before thy haughty sister.<br/>
“Listen, bride, to what I tell thee:<br/>
In thy home thou wert a jewel,<br/>
Wert thy father’s pride and pleasure,<br/>
‘Moonlight,’ did thy father call thee,<br/>
And thy mother called thee ‘Sunshine,’<br/>
‘Sea-foam’ did thy brother call thee,<br/>
And thy sister called thee ‘Flower.’<br/>
When thou leavest home and kindred<br/>
Goest to a second mother,<br/>
Often she will give thee censure,<br/>
Never treat thee as her daughter,<br/>
Rarely will she give thee counsel,<br/>
Never will she sound thy praises.<br/>
‘Brush-wood,’ will the father call thee,<br/>
‘Sledge of Rags,’ thy husband’s mother,<br/>
‘Flight of Stairs,’ thy stranger brother,<br/>
‘Scare-crow,’ will the sister call thee,<br/>
Sister of thy blacksmith-husband;<br/>
Then wilt think of my good counsels,<br/>
Then wilt wish in tears and murmurs,<br/>
That as steam thou hadst ascended,<br/>
That as smoke thy soul had risen,<br/>
That as sparks thy life had vanished.<br/>
As a bird thou canst not wander<br/>
From thy nest to circle homeward,<br/>
Canst not fall and die like leaflets,<br/>
As the sparks thou canst not perish,<br/>
Like the smoke thou canst not vanish.<br/>
“Youthful bride, and darling sister,<br/>
Thou hast bartered all thy friendships,<br/>
Hast exchanged thy loving father,<br/>
Thou hast left thy faithful mother<br/>
For the mother of thy husband;<br/>
Hast exchanged thy loving brother,<br/>
Hast renounced thy gentle sister,<br/>
For the kindred of thy suitor;<br/>
Hast exchanged thy snow-white covers<br/>
For the rocky couch of sorrow;<br/>
Hast exchanged these crystal waters<br/>
For the waters of Wainola;<br/>
Hast renounced these sandy sea-shores<br/>
For the muddy banks of Kalew;<br/>
Northland glens thou hast forsaken<br/>
For thy husband’s barren meadows;<br/>
Thou hast left thy berry-mountains<br/>
For the stubble-fields and deserts.<br/>
“Thou, O maiden, hast been thinking<br/>
Thou wouldst happy be in wedlock;<br/>
Neither work, nor care, nor sorrow,<br/>
From this night would be thy portion,<br/>
With thy husband for protection.<br/>
Not to sleep art thou conducted,<br/>
Not to happiness, nor joyance,<br/>
Wakefulness, thy night-companion,<br/>
And thy day-attendant, trouble;<br/>
Often thou wilt drink of sorrow,<br/>
Often long for vanished pleasures.<br/>
“When at home thou hadst no head-gear,<br/>
Thou hadst also little sadness;<br/>
When thy couch was not of linen,<br/>
No unhappiness came nigh thee;<br/>
Head-gear brings but pain and sorrow,<br/>
Linen breeds bad dispositions,<br/>
Linen brings but deeps of anguish,<br/>
And the flax untimely mourning.<br/>
“Happy in her home, the maiden,<br/>
Happy at her father’s fireside,<br/>
Like the master in his mansion,<br/>
Happy with her bows and arrows.<br/>
’Tis not thus with married women;<br/>
Brides of heroes may be likened<br/>
To the prisoners of Moskva,<br/>
Held in bondage by their masters.<br/>
“As a wife, must weep and labor,<br/>
Carry trouble on both shoulders;<br/>
When the next hour passes over,<br/>
Thou must tend the fire and oven,<br/>
Must prepare thy husband’s dinner,<br/>
Must direct thy master’s servants.<br/>
When thine evening meal is ready,<br/>
Thou must search for bidden wisdom<br/>
In the brain of perch and salmon,<br/>
In the mouths of ocean whiting,<br/>
Gather wisdom from the cuckoo,<br/>
Canst not learn it from thy mother,<br/>
Mother dear of seven daughters;<br/>
Cannot find among her treasures<br/>
Where were born the human instincts,<br/>
Where were born the minds of heroes,<br/>
Whence arose the maiden’s beauty,<br/>
Whence the beauty of her tresses,<br/>
Why all life revives in spring-time.<br/>
“Weep, O weep, my pretty young bride.<br/>
When thou weepest, weep sincerely,<br/>
Weep great rivers from thine eyelids,<br/>
Floods of tears in field and fallow,<br/>
Lakelets in thy father’s dwelling;<br/>
Weep thy rooms to overflowing,<br/>
Shed thy tears in great abundance,<br/>
Lest thou weepest on returning<br/>
To thy native hills and valleys,<br/>
When thou visitest thy father<br/>
In the smoke of waning glory,<br/>
On his arm a withered tassel.<br/>
“Weep, O weep, my lovely maiden,<br/>
When thou weepest, weep in earnest,<br/>
Weep great rivers from thine eyelids;<br/>
If thou dost not weep sincerely,<br/>
Thou wilt weep on thy returning<br/>
To thy Northland home and kindred,<br/>
When thou visitest thy mother<br/>
Old and breathless near the hurdles,<br/>
In her arms a barley-bundle.<br/>
“Weep, O weep, sweet bride of beauty,<br/>
When thou weepest, weep profusely;<br/>
If thou dost not weep in earnest,<br/>
Thou wilt weep on thy returning<br/>
To thy native vales and highlands,<br/>
When thou visitest thy brother<br/>
Lying wounded by the way-side,<br/>
In his hand but empty honors.<br/>
“Weep, O weep, my sister’s daughter,<br/>
Weep great rivers from thine eyelids;<br/>
If thou dost not weep sufficient,<br/>
Thou wilt weep on thy returning<br/>
To the scenes of happy childhood,<br/>
When thou visitest thy sister<br/>
Lying, prostrate in the meadow,<br/>
In her hand a birch-wood mallet.”<br/>
When the ancient maid had ended,<br/>
Then the young bride sighed in anguish,<br/>
Straightway fell to bitter weeping,<br/>
Spake these words in deeps of sorrow:<br/>
“O, ye sisters, my beloved,<br/>
Ye companions of my childhood,<br/>
Playmates of my early summers,<br/>
Listen to your sister’s counsel:<br/>
Cannot comprehend the reason,<br/>
Why my mind is so dejected,<br/>
Why this weariness and sadness,<br/>
This untold and unseen torture,<br/>
Cannot understand the meaning<br/>
Of this mighty weight of sorrow!<br/>
Differently I had thought it,<br/>
I had hoped for greater pleasures,<br/>
I had hoped to sing as cuckoos,<br/>
On the hill-tops call and echo,<br/>
When I had attained this station,<br/>
Reached at last the goal expectant;<br/>
But I am not like the cuckoo,<br/>
Singing, merry on the hill-tops;<br/>
I am like the songless blue-duck,<br/>
As she swims upon the waters,<br/>
Swims upon the cold, cold ocean,<br/>
Icicles upon her pinions.<br/>
“Ancient father, gray-haired mother,<br/>
Whither do ye wish to lead me,<br/>
Whither take this bride, thy daughter,<br/>
That this sorrow may pass over,<br/>
Where this heavy heart may lighten,<br/>
Where this grief may turn to gladness?<br/>
Better it had been, O mother,<br/>
Hadst thou nursed a block of birch-wood,<br/>
Hadst thou clothed the colored sandstone,<br/>
Rather than this hapless maiden,<br/>
For the fulness of these sorrows,<br/>
For this keen and killing trouble.<br/>
Many sympathizers tell me:<br/>
‘Foolish bride, thou art ungrateful,<br/>
Do not grieve, thou child of sorrow,<br/>
Thou hast little cause for weeping.’<br/>
“O, deceive me not, my people,<br/>
Do not argue with me falsely,<br/>
For alas! I have more troubles<br/>
Than the waterfalls have pebbles,<br/>
Than the Ingerland has willows,<br/>
Than the Suomi-hills have berries;<br/>
Never could the Pohya plow-horse<br/>
Pull this mighty weight of sorrow,<br/>
Shaking not his birchen cross-bar,<br/>
Breaking not his heavy collar;<br/>
Never could the Northland reindeer<br/>
Heavy shod and stoutly harnessed,<br/>
Draw this load of care and trouble.”<br/>
By the stove a babe was playing,<br/>
And the young child spake as follows:<br/>
“Why, O fair bride, art thou weeping,<br/>
Why these tears of pain and sadness?<br/>
Leave thy troubles to the elk-herds,<br/>
And thy grief to sable fillies,<br/>
Let the steeds of iron bridles<br/>
Bear the burden of thine anguish,<br/>
Horses have much larger foreheads,<br/>
Larger shoulders, stronger sinews,<br/>
And their necks are made for labor,<br/>
Stronger are their bones and muscles,<br/>
Let them bear thy heavy burdens.<br/>
There is little good in weeping,<br/>
Useless are thy tears of sorrow;<br/>
Art not led to swamps and lowlands,<br/>
Nor to banks of little rivers;<br/>
Thou art led to fields of flowers,<br/>
Led to fruitful trees and forests,<br/>
Led away from beer of Pohya<br/>
To the sweeter mead of Kalew.<br/>
At thy shoulder waits thy husband,<br/>
On thy right side, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Constant friend and life-protector,<br/>
He will guard thee from all evil;<br/>
Husband ready, steed in waiting,<br/>
Gold-and-silver-mounted harness,<br/>
Hazel-birds that sing and flutter<br/>
On the courser’s yoke and cross-bar;<br/>
Thrushes also sing and twitter<br/>
Merrily on hame and collar,<br/>
Seven bluebirds, seven cuckoos,<br/>
Sing thy wedding-march in concord.<br/>
“Be no longer full of sorrow,<br/>
Dry thy tears, thou bride of beauty,<br/>
Thou hast found a noble husband,<br/>
Better wilt thou fare than ever,<br/>
By the side of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Artist husband, metal-master,<br/>
Bread-provider of thy table,<br/>
On the arm of the fish-catcher,<br/>
On the breast of the elk-hunter,<br/>
By the side of the bear-killer.<br/>
Thou hast won the best of suitors,<br/>
Hast obtained a mighty hero;<br/>
Never idle is his cross-bow,<br/>
On the nails his quivers hang not,<br/>
Neither are his dogs in kennel,<br/>
Active agents is his bunting.<br/>
Thrice within the budding spring-time<br/>
In the early hours of morning<br/>
He arises from his fare-couch,<br/>
From his slumber in the brush-wood,<br/>
Thrice within the sowing season,<br/>
On his eyes the deer has fallen,<br/>
And the branches brushed his vesture,<br/>
And his locks been combed by fir-boughs.<br/>
Hasten homeward with thy husband,<br/>
Where thy hero’s friends await thee,<br/>
Where his forests sing thy welcome.<br/>
“Ilmarinen there possesses<br/>
All the birds that fly in mid-air,<br/>
All the beasts that haunt the woodlands,<br/>
All that feed upon the mountains,<br/>
All that graze on hill and valley,<br/>
Sheep and cattle by the thousands;<br/>
Sweet the grass upon his meadows,<br/>
Sweet the barley in his uplands,<br/>
In the lowlands corn abundant,<br/>
Wheat upon the elm-wood fallows,<br/>
Near the streamlets rye is waving,<br/>
Waving grain on many acres,<br/>
On his mountains gold and silver,<br/>
Rich his mines of shining copper,<br/>
Highlands filled with magic metals,<br/>
Chests of jewels in his store-house,<br/>
All the wealth of Kalevala.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap23"/>RUNE XXIII.<br/>
OSMOTAR THE BRIDE-ADVISER</h2>
<p>Now the bride must be instructed,<br/>
Who will teach the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Who instruct the Rainbow-daughter?<br/>
Osmotar, the wisdom-maiden,<br/>
Kalew’s fair and lovely virgin,<br/>
Osmotar will give instructions<br/>
To the bride of Ilmarinen,<br/>
To the orphaned bride of Pohya,<br/>
Teach her how to live in pleasure,<br/>
How to live and reign in glory,<br/>
Win her second mother’s praises,<br/>
Joyful in her husband’s dwelling.<br/>
Osmotar in modest accents<br/>
Thus the anxious bride addresses;<br/>
“Maid of Beauty, lovely sister,<br/>
Tender plant of Louhi’s gardens,<br/>
Hear thou what thy sister teaches,<br/>
Listen to her sage instructions:<br/>
Go thou hence, my much beloved,<br/>
Wander far away, my flower,<br/>
Travel on enwrapped in colors,<br/>
Glide away in silks and ribbons,<br/>
From this house renowned and ancient,<br/>
From thy father’s halls and court-yards<br/>
Haste thee to thy husband’s village,<br/>
Hasten to his mother’s household;<br/>
Strange, the rooms in other dwellings,<br/>
Strange, the modes in other hamlets.<br/>
“Full of thought must be thy going,<br/>
And thy work be well considered,<br/>
Quite unlike thy home in Northland,<br/>
On the meadows of thy father,<br/>
On the high-lands of thy brother,<br/>
Singing through thy mother’s fenlands,<br/>
Culling daisies with thy sister.<br/>
“When thou goest from thy father<br/>
Thou canst take whatever pleases,<br/>
Only three things leave behind thee:<br/>
Leave thy day-dreams to thy sister,<br/>
Leave thou kindness for thy mother,<br/>
To thy brother leave thy labors,<br/>
Take all else that thou desirest.<br/>
Throw away thine incantations,<br/>
Cast thy sighing to the pine-trees,<br/>
And thy maidenhood to zephyrs,<br/>
Thy rejoicings to the couches,<br/>
Cast thy trinkets to the children,<br/>
And thy leisure to the gray-beards,<br/>
Cast all pleasures to thy playmates,<br/>
Let them take them to the woodlands,<br/>
Bury them beneath the mountain.<br/>
“Thou must hence acquire new habits,<br/>
Must forget thy former customs,<br/>
Mother-love must be forsaken,<br/>
Thou must love thy husband’s mother,<br/>
Lower must thy head be bended,<br/>
Kind words only must thou utter.<br/>
“Thou must hence acquire new habits,<br/>
Must forget thy former customs,<br/>
Father-love must be forsaken,<br/>
Thou must love thy husband’s father,<br/>
Lower must thy head be bended,<br/>
Kind words only must thou utter.<br/>
“Thou must hence acquire new habits,<br/>
Must forget thy former customs,<br/>
Brother-love must be forsaken,<br/>
Thou must love thy husband’s brother,<br/>
Lower must thy head be bended,<br/>
Kind words only must thou utter.<br/>
“Thou must hence acquire new habits<br/>
Must forget thy former customs,<br/>
Sister-love must be forsaken,<br/>
Thou must love thy husband’s sister,<br/>
Lower must thy head be bended,<br/>
Kind words only must thou utter.<br/>
“Never in the course of ages,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers,<br/>
Wickedly approach thy household,<br/>
Nor unworthily, thy servants,<br/>
Nor thy courts with indiscretion;<br/>
Let thy dwellings sing good manners,<br/>
And thy walls re-echo virtue.<br/>
After mind the hero searches.<br/>
And the best of men seek honor,<br/>
Seek for honesty and wisdom;<br/>
If thy home should be immoral,<br/>
If thine inmates fail in virtue,<br/>
Then thy gray-beards would be black-dogs<br/>
In sheep’s clothing at thy firesides;<br/>
All thy women would be witches,<br/>
Wicked witches in thy chambers,<br/>
And thy brothers be as serpents<br/>
Crawling through thy husband’s mansion;<br/>
All thy sisters would be famous<br/>
For their evil thoughts and conduct.<br/>
“Equal honors must be given<br/>
To thy husband’s friends and kindred;<br/>
Lower must thy head be bended,<br/>
Than within thy mother’s dwelling,<br/>
Than within thy father’s guest-room,<br/>
When thou didst thy kindred honor.<br/>
Ever strive to give good counsel,<br/>
Wear a countenance of sunshine,<br/>
Bear a head upon thy shoulders<br/>
Filled with wise and ancient sayings;<br/>
Open bright thine eyes at morning<br/>
To behold the silver sunrise,<br/>
Sharpen well thine ears at evening,<br/>
Thus to hear the rooster crowing;<br/>
When he makes his second calling,<br/>
Straightway thou must rise from slumber,<br/>
Let the aged sleep in quiet;<br/>
Should the rooster fail to call thee,<br/>
Let the moonbeams touch thine eyelids,<br/>
Let the Great Bear be thy keeper<br/>
Often go thou and consult them,<br/>
Call upon the Moon for counsel,<br/>
Ask the Bear for ancient wisdom,<br/>
From the stars divine thy future;<br/>
When the Great Bear faces southward,<br/>
When his tail is pointing northward,<br/>
This is time to break with slumber,<br/>
Seek for fire within the ashes,<br/>
Place a spark upon the tinder,<br/>
Blow the fire through all the fuel.<br/>
If no spark is in the ashes,<br/>
Then go wake thy hero-husband,<br/>
Speak these words to him on waking:<br/>
‘Give me fire, O my beloved,<br/>
Give a single spark, my husband,<br/>
Strike a little fire from flintstone,<br/>
Let it fall upon my tinder.’<br/>
“From the spark, O Bride of Beauty,<br/>
Light thy fires, and heat thine ovens,<br/>
In the holder, place the torch-light,<br/>
Find thy pathway to the stables,<br/>
There to fill the empty mangers;<br/>
If thy husband’s cows be lowing,<br/>
If thy brother’s steeds be neighing,<br/>
Then the cows await thy coming,<br/>
And the steeds for thee are calling,<br/>
Hasten, stooping through the hurdles,<br/>
Hasten through the yards and stables,<br/>
Feed thy husband’s cows with pleasure,<br/>
Feed with care the gentle lambkins,<br/>
Give the cows the best of clover,<br/>
Hay, and barley, to the horses,<br/>
Feed the calves of lowing mothers,<br/>
Feed the fowl that fly to meet thee.<br/>
“Never rest upon the haymow,<br/>
Never sleep within the hurdles,<br/>
When the kine are fed and tended,<br/>
When the flocks have all been watered;<br/>
Hasten thence, my pretty matron,<br/>
Like the snow-flakes to thy dwelling,<br/>
There a crying babe awaits thee,<br/>
Weeping in his couch neglected,<br/>
Cannot speak and tell his troubles,<br/>
Speechless babe, and weeping infant,<br/>
Cannot say that he is hungry,<br/>
Whether pain or cold distresses,<br/>
Greets with joy his mother’s footsteps.<br/>
Afterward repair in silence<br/>
To thy husband’s rooms and presence,<br/>
Early visit thou his chambers,<br/>
In thy hand a golden pitcher,<br/>
On thine arm a broom of birch-wood,<br/>
In thy teeth a lighted taper,<br/>
And thyself the fourth in order.<br/>
Sweep thou then thy hero’s dwelling,<br/>
Dust his benches and his tables,<br/>
Wash the flooring well with water.<br/>
“If the baby of thy sister<br/>
Play alone within his corner,<br/>
Show the little child attention,<br/>
Bathe his eyes and smoothe his ringlets,<br/>
Give the infant needed comforts;<br/>
Shouldst thou have no bread of barley,<br/>
In his hand adjust some trinket.<br/>
“Lastly, when the week has ended,<br/>
Give thy house a thorough cleansing,<br/>
Benches, tables, walls, and ceilings;<br/>
What of dust is on the windows,<br/>
Sweep away with broom of birch-twigs,<br/>
All thy rooms must first be sprinkled,<br/>
at the dust may not be scattered,<br/>
May not fill the halls and chambers.<br/>
Sweep the dust from every crevice,<br/>
Leave thou not a single atom;<br/>
Also sweep the chimney-corners,<br/>
Do not then forget the rafters,<br/>
Lest thy home should seem untidy,<br/>
Lest thy dwelling seem neglected.<br/>
“Hear, O maiden, what I tell thee,<br/>
Learn the tenor of my teaching:<br/>
Never dress in scanty raiment,<br/>
Let thy robes be plain and comely,<br/>
Ever wear the whitest linen,<br/>
On thy feet wear tidy fur-shoes,<br/>
For the glory of thy husband,<br/>
For the honor of thy hero.<br/>
Tend thou well the sacred sorb-tree,<br/>
Guard the mountain-ashes planted<br/>
In the court-yard, widely branching;<br/>
Beautiful the mountain-ashes,<br/>
Beautiful their leaves and flowers,<br/>
Still more beautiful the berries.<br/>
Thus the exiled one demonstrates<br/>
That she lives to please her husband,<br/>
Tries to make her hero happy.<br/>
“Like the mouse, have ears for hearing,<br/>
Like the hare, have feet for running,<br/>
Bend thy neck and turn thy visage<br/>
Like the juniper and aspen,<br/>
Thus to watch with care thy goings,<br/>
Thus to guard thy feet from stumbling,<br/>
That thou mayest walk in safety.<br/>
“When thy brother comes from plowing,<br/>
And thy father from his garners,<br/>
And thy husband from the woodlands,<br/>
From his chopping, thy beloved,<br/>
Give to each a water-basin,<br/>
Give to each a linen-towel,<br/>
Speak to each some pleasant greeting.<br/>
“When thy second mother hastens<br/>
To thy husband’s home and kindred,<br/>
In her hand a corn-meal measure,<br/>
Haste thou to the court to meet her,<br/>
Happy-hearted, bow before her,<br/>
Take the measure from her fingers,<br/>
Happy, bear it to thy husband.<br/>
“If thou shouldst not see distinctly<br/>
What demands thy next attention,<br/>
Ask at once thy hero’s mother:<br/>
‘Second mother, my beloved,<br/>
Name the task to be accomplished<br/>
By thy willing second daughter,<br/>
Tell me how to best perform it.’<br/>
“This should be the mother’s answer:<br/>
‘This the manner of thy workings,<br/>
Thus thy daily work accomplish:<br/>
Stamp with diligence and courage,<br/>
Grind with will and great endurance,<br/>
Set the millstones well in order,<br/>
Fill the barley-pans with water,<br/>
Knead with strength the dough for baking,<br/>
Place the fagots on the fire-place,<br/>
That thy ovens may be heated,<br/>
Bake in love the honey-biscuit,<br/>
Bake the larger loaves of barley,<br/>
Rinse to cleanliness thy platters,<br/>
Polish well thy drinking-vessels.<br/>
“If thou hearest from the mother,<br/>
From the mother of thy husband,<br/>
That the cask for meal is empty,<br/>
Take the barley from the garners,<br/>
Hasten to the rooms for grinding.<br/>
When thou grindest in the chambers,<br/>
Do not sing in glee and joyance,<br/>
Turn the grinding-stones in silence,<br/>
To the mill give up thy singing,<br/>
Let the side-holes furnish music;<br/>
Do not sigh as if unhappy,<br/>
Do not groan as if in trouble,<br/>
Lest the father think thee weary,<br/>
Lest thy husband’s mother fancy<br/>
That thy groans mean discontentment,<br/>
That thy sighing means displeasure.<br/>
Quickly sift the flour thou grindest,<br/>
Take it to the casks in buckets,<br/>
Bake thy hero’s bread with pleasure,<br/>
Knead the dough with care and patience,<br/>
That thy biscuits may be worthy,<br/>
That the dough be light and airy.<br/>
“Shouldst thou see a bucket empty,<br/>
Take the bucket on thy shoulder,<br/>
On thine arm a silver-dipper,<br/>
Hasten off to fill with water<br/>
From the crystal river flowing;<br/>
Gracefully thy bucket carry,<br/>
Bear it firmly by the handles,<br/>
Hasten houseward like the zephyrs,<br/>
Hasten like the air of autumn;<br/>
Do not tarry near the streamlet,<br/>
At the waters do not linger,<br/>
That the father may not fancy,<br/>
Nor the ancient dame imagine,<br/>
That thou hast beheld thine image,<br/>
Hast admired thy form and features,<br/>
Hast admired thy grace and beauty<br/>
In the mirror of the fountain,<br/>
In the crystal streamlet’s eddies.<br/>
“Shouldst thou journey to the woodlands,<br/>
There to gather aspen-fagots,<br/>
Do not go with noise and bustle,<br/>
Gather all thy sticks in silence,<br/>
Gather quietly the birch-wood,<br/>
That the father may not fancy,<br/>
And the mother not imagine,<br/>
That thy calling came from anger,<br/>
And thy noise from discontentment.<br/>
“If thou goest to the store-house<br/>
To obtain the flour of barley,<br/>
Do not tarry on thy journey,<br/>
On the threshold do not linger,<br/>
That the father may not fancy,<br/>
And the mother not imagine,<br/>
That the meal thou hast divided<br/>
With the women of the village.<br/>
“If thou goest to the river,<br/>
There to wash thy birchen platters,<br/>
There to cleanse thy pans and buckets,<br/>
Lest thy work be done in neatness,<br/>
Rinse the sides, and rinse the handles,<br/>
Rinse thy pitchers to perfection,<br/>
Spoons, and forks, and knives, and goblets,<br/>
Rinse with care thy cooking-vessels,<br/>
Closely watch the food-utensils,<br/>
That the dogs may not deface them,<br/>
That the kittens may not mar them,<br/>
That the eagles may not steal them,<br/>
That the children may not break them;<br/>
Many children in the village,<br/>
Many little heads and fingers,<br/>
That will need thy careful watching,<br/>
Lest they steal the things of value.<br/>
“When thou goest to thy bathing,<br/>
Have the brushes ready lying<br/>
In the bath-room clean and smokeless;<br/>
Do not, linger in the water,<br/>
At thy bathing do not tarry,<br/>
That the father may not fancy,<br/>
And the mother not imagine,<br/>
Thou art sleeping on the benches,<br/>
Rolling in the laps of comfort.<br/>
“From thy bath, when thou returnest,<br/>
To his bathing tempt the father,<br/>
Speak to him the words that follow:<br/>
‘Father of my hero-husband,<br/>
Clean are all the bath-room benches,<br/>
Everything in perfect order;<br/>
Go and bathe for thine enjoyment,<br/>
Pour the water all-sufficient,<br/>
I will lend thee needed service.’<br/>
“When the time has come for spinning,<br/>
When the hours arrive for weaving,<br/>
Do not ask the help of others,<br/>
Look not in the stream for knowledge,<br/>
For advice ask not the servants,<br/>
Nor the spindle from the sisters,<br/>
Nor the weaving-comb from strangers.<br/>
Thou thyself must do the spinning,<br/>
With thine own hand ply the shuttle,<br/>
Loosely wind the skeins of wool-yarn,<br/>
Tightly wind the balls of flax-thread,<br/>
Wind them deftly in the shuttle<br/>
Fit the warp upon the rollers,<br/>
Beat the woof and warp together,<br/>
Swiftly ply the weaver’s shuttle,<br/>
Weave good cloth for all thy vestments,<br/>
Weave of woolen, webs for dresses<br/>
From the finest wool of lambkins,<br/>
One thread only in thy weaving.<br/>
“Hear thou what I now advise thee:<br/>
Brew thy beer from early barley,<br/>
From the barley’s new-grown kernels,<br/>
Brew it with the magic virtues,<br/>
Malt it with the sweets of honey,<br/>
Do not stir it with the birch-rod,<br/>
Stir it with thy skilful fingers;<br/>
When thou goest to the garners,<br/>
Do not let the seed bring evil,<br/>
Keep the dogs outside the brew-house,<br/>
Have no fear of wolves in hunger,<br/>
Nor the wild-beasts of the mountains,<br/>
When thou goest to thy brewing,<br/>
Shouldst thou wander forth at midnight.<br/>
“Should some stranger come to see thee,<br/>
Do not worry for his comfort;<br/>
Ever does the worthy household<br/>
Have provisions for the stranger,<br/>
Bits of meat, and bread, and biscuit,<br/>
Ample for the dinner-table;<br/>
Seat the stranger in thy dwelling,<br/>
Speak with him in friendly accents,<br/>
Entertain the guest with kindness,<br/>
While his dinner is preparing.<br/>
When the stranger leaves thy threshold,<br/>
When his farewell has been spoken,<br/>
Lead him only to the portals,<br/>
Do not step without the doorway,<br/>
That thy husband may not fancy,<br/>
And the mother not imagine,<br/>
Thou hast interest in strangers.<br/>
“Shouldst thou ever make a journey<br/>
To the centre of the village,<br/>
There to gain some needed object,<br/>
While thou speakest in the hamlet,<br/>
Let thy words be full of wisdom,<br/>
That thou shamest not thy kindred,<br/>
Nor disgrace thy husband’s household.<br/>
“Village-maidens oft will ask thee,<br/>
Mothers of the hamlet question:<br/>
‘Does thy husband’s mother greet thee<br/>
As in childhood thou wert greeted,<br/>
In thy happy home in Pohya?’<br/>
Do not answer in negation,<br/>
Say that she has always given<br/>
Thee the best of her provisions,<br/>
Given thee the kindest greetings,<br/>
Though it be but once a season.<br/>
“Listen well to what I tell thee:<br/>
As thou goest from thy father<br/>
To thy husband’s distant dwelling,<br/>
Thou must not forget thy mother,<br/>
Her that gave thee life and beauty,<br/>
Her that nurtured thee in childhood,<br/>
Many sleepless nights she nursed thee;<br/>
Often were her wants neglected,<br/>
Numberless the times she rocked thee;<br/>
Tender, true, and ever faithful,<br/>
Is the mother to her daughter.<br/>
She that can forget her mother,<br/>
Can neglect the one that nursed her,<br/>
Should not visit Mana’s castle,<br/>
In the kingdom of Tuoni;<br/>
In Manala she would suffer,<br/>
Suffer frightful retribution,<br/>
Should her mother be forgotten;<br/>
Should her dear one be neglected,<br/>
Mana’s daughters will torment her,<br/>
And Tuoni’s sons revile her,<br/>
They will ask her much as follows:<br/>
‘How couldst thou forget thy mother,<br/>
How neglect the one that nursed thee?<br/>
Great the pain thy mother suffered,<br/>
Great the trouble that thou gavest<br/>
When thy loving mother brought thee<br/>
Into life for good or evil,<br/>
When she gave thee earth-existence,<br/>
When she nursed thee but an infant,<br/>
When she fed thee in thy childhood,<br/>
When she taught thee what thou knowest,<br/>
Mana’s punishments upon thee,<br/>
Since thy mother is forgotten!’”<br/>
On the floor a witch was sitting,<br/>
Near the fire a beggar-woman,<br/>
One that knew the ways of people,<br/>
These the words the woman uttered:<br/>
“Thus the crow calls in the winter:<br/>
‘Would that I could be a singer,<br/>
And my voice be full of sweetness,<br/>
But, alas! my songs are worthless,<br/>
Cannot charm the weakest creature;<br/>
I must live without the singing<br/>
Leave the songs to the musicians,<br/>
Those that live in golden houses,<br/>
In the homes of the beloved;<br/>
Homeless therefore I must wander,<br/>
Like a beggar in the corn-fields,<br/>
And with none to do me honor.’<br/>
“Hear now, sister, what I tell thee,<br/>
Enter thou thy husband’s dwelling,<br/>
Follow not his mind, nor fancies,<br/>
As my husband’s mind I followed;<br/>
As a flower was I when budding,<br/>
Sprouting like a rose in spring-time,<br/>
Growing like a slender maiden,<br/>
Like the honey-gem of glory,<br/>
Like the playmates of my childhood,<br/>
Like the goslings of my father,<br/>
Like the blue-ducks of my mother,<br/>
Like my brother’s water-younglings,<br/>
Like the bullfinch of my sister;<br/>
Grew I like the heather-flower,<br/>
Like the berry of the meadow,<br/>
Played upon the sandy sea-shore,<br/>
Rocked upon the fragrant upland,<br/>
Sang all day adown the valley,<br/>
Thrilled with song the hill and mountain,<br/>
Filled with mirth the glen and forest,<br/>
Lived and frolicked in the woodlands.<br/>
“Into traps are foxes driven<br/>
By the cruel pangs of hunger,<br/>
Into traps, the cunning ermine;<br/>
Thus are maidens wooed and wedded,<br/>
In their hunger for a husband.<br/>
Thus created is the virgin,<br/>
Thus intended is the daughter,<br/>
Subject to her hero-husband,<br/>
Subject also to his mother.<br/>
“Then to other fields I hastened,<br/>
Like a berry from the border,<br/>
Like a cranberry for roasting,<br/>
Like a strawberry for dinner;<br/>
All the elm-trees seemed to wound me,<br/>
All the aspens tried to cut me,<br/>
All the willows tried to seize me,<br/>
All the forest tried to slay me.<br/>
Thus I journeyed to my husband,<br/>
Thus I travelled to his dwelling,<br/>
Was conducted to his mother.<br/>
Then there were, as was reported,<br/>
Six compartments built of pine-wood,<br/>
Twelve the number of the chambers,<br/>
And the mansion filled with garrets,<br/>
Studding all the forest border,<br/>
Every by-way filled with flowers<br/>
Streamlets bordered fields of barley,<br/>
Filled with wheat and corn, the islands,<br/>
Grain in plenty in the garners,<br/>
Rye unthrashed in great abundance,<br/>
Countless sums of gold and silver,<br/>
Other treasures without number.<br/>
When my journey I had ended,<br/>
When my hand at last was given,<br/>
Six supports were in his cabin,<br/>
Seven poles as rails for fencing.<br/>
Filled with anger were the bushes,<br/>
All the glens disfavor showing,<br/>
All the walks were lined with trouble,<br/>
Evil-tempered were the forests,<br/>
Hundred words of evil import,<br/>
Hundred others of unkindness.<br/>
Did not let this bring me sorrow,<br/>
Long I sought to merit praises,<br/>
Long I hoped to find some favor,<br/>
Strove most earnestly for kindness;<br/>
When they led me to the cottage,<br/>
There I tried some chips to gather,<br/>
Knocked my head against the portals<br/>
Of my husband’s lowly dwelling.<br/>
“At the door were eyes of strangers,<br/>
Sable eyes at the partition,<br/>
Green with envy in his cabin,<br/>
Evil heroes in the back-ground,<br/>
From each mouth the fire was streaming,<br/>
From each tongue the sparks out-flying,<br/>
Flying from my second father,<br/>
From his eyeballs of unkindness.<br/>
Did not let this bring me trouble,<br/>
Tried to live in peace and pleasure,<br/>
In the homestead of my husband<br/>
In humility I suffered,<br/>
Skipped about with feet of rabbit,<br/>
Flew along with steps of ermine,<br/>
Late I laid my head to slumber,<br/>
Early rose as if a servant,<br/>
Could not win a touch of kindness,<br/>
Could not merit love nor honor,<br/>
Though I had dislodged the mountains,<br/>
Though the rocks had I torn open.<br/>
“Then I turned the heavy millstone,<br/>
Ground the flour with care and trouble,<br/>
Ground the barley-grains in patience,<br/>
That the mother might be nourished,<br/>
That her fury-throat might swallow<br/>
What might please her taste and fancy,.<br/>
From her gold-enamelled platters,<br/>
From the corner of her table.<br/>
“As for me, the hapless daughter,<br/>
All my flour was from the siftings<br/>
On the table near the oven,<br/>
Ate I from the birchen ladle;<br/>
Oftentimes I brought the mosses<br/>
Gathered in the lowland meadows,<br/>
Baked them into loaves for eating;<br/>
Brought the water from the river,<br/>
Thirsty, sipped it from the dipper,<br/>
Ate of fish the worst in Northland,<br/>
Only smelts, and worthless swimmers,<br/>
Rocking in my boat of birch-bark<br/>
Never ate I fish or biscuit<br/>
From my second mother’s fingers.<br/>
“Blades I gathered in the summers,<br/>
Twisted barley-stalks in winter,<br/>
Like the laborers of heroes,<br/>
Like the servants sold in bondage.<br/>
In the thresh-house of my husband,<br/>
Evermore to me was given<br/>
Flail the heaviest and longest,<br/>
And to me the longest lever,<br/>
On the shore the strongest beater,<br/>
And the largest rake in haying;<br/>
No one thought my burden heavy,<br/>
No one thought that I could suffer,<br/>
Though the best of heroes faltered,<br/>
And the strongest women weakened.<br/>
“Thus did I, a youthful housewife,<br/>
At the right time, all my duties,<br/>
Drenched myself in perspiration,<br/>
Hoped for better times to follow;<br/>
But I only rose to labor,<br/>
Knowing neither rest nor pleasure.<br/>
I was blamed by all the household,<br/>
With ungrateful tongues derided,<br/>
Now about my awkward manners,<br/>
Now about my reputation,<br/>
Censuring my name and station.<br/>
Words unkind were heaped upon me,<br/>
Fell like hail on me unhappy,<br/>
Like the frightful flash of lightning,<br/>
Like the heavy hail of spring-time.<br/>
I did not despair entirely,<br/>
Would have lived to labor longer<br/>
Underneath the tongue of malice,<br/>
But the old-one spoiled Lay temper,<br/>
Roused my deepest ire and hatred<br/>
Then my husband grew a wild-bear,<br/>
Grew a savage wolf of Hisi.<br/>
“Only then I turned to weeping,<br/>
And reflected in my chamber,<br/>
Thought of all my former pleasures<br/>
Of the happy days of childhood,<br/>
Of my father’s joyful firesides,<br/>
Of my mother’s peaceful cottage,<br/>
Then began I thus to murmur:<br/>
‘Well thou knowest, ancient mother,<br/>
How to make thy sweet bud blossom,<br/>
How to train thy tender shootlet;<br/>
Did not know where to ingraft it,<br/>
Placed, alas! the little scion<br/>
In the very worst of places,<br/>
On an unproductive hillock,<br/>
In the hardest limb of cherry,<br/>
Where it could not grow and flourish,<br/>
There to waste its life, in weeping,<br/>
Hapless in her lasting sorrow.<br/>
Worthier had been my conduct<br/>
In the regions that are better,<br/>
In the court-yards that are wider,<br/>
In compartments that are larger,<br/>
Living with a loving husband,<br/>
Living with a stronger hero.<br/>
Shoe of birch-bark was my suitor,<br/>
Shoe of Laplanders, my husband;<br/>
Had the body of a raven,<br/>
Voice and visage like the jackdaw,<br/>
Mouth and claws were from the black-wolf,<br/>
The remainder from the wild-bear.<br/>
Had I known that mine affianced<br/>
Was a fount of pain and evil,<br/>
To the hill-side I had wandered,<br/>
Been a pine-tree on the highway,<br/>
Been a linden on the border,<br/>
Like the black-earth made my visage,<br/>
Grown a beard of ugly bristles,<br/>
Head of loam and eyes of lightning,<br/>
For my ears the knots of birches,<br/>
For my limbs the trunks of aspens.’<br/>
“This the manner of my singing<br/>
In the hearing of my husband,<br/>
Thus I sang my cares and murmurs<br/>
Thus my hero near the portals<br/>
Heard the wail of my displeasure,<br/>
Then he hastened to my chamber;<br/>
Straightway knew I by his footsteps,<br/>
Well concluded be was angry,<br/>
‘Knew it by his steps implanted;<br/>
All the winds were still in slumber,<br/>
Yet his sable locks stood endwise,<br/>
Fluttered round his bead in fury,<br/>
While his horrid mouth stood open;<br/>
To and fro his eyes were rolling,<br/>
In one hand a branch of willow,<br/>
In the other, club of alder;<br/>
Struck at me with might of malice,<br/>
Aimed the cudgel at my forehead.<br/>
“When the evening had descended,<br/>
When my husband thought of slumber<br/>
Took he in his hand a whip-stalk,<br/>
With a whip-lash made of deer-skin,<br/>
Was not made for any other,<br/>
Only made for me unhappy.<br/>
“When at last I begged for mercy,<br/>
When I sought a place for resting,<br/>
By his side I courted slumber,<br/>
Merciless, my husband seized me,<br/>
Struck me with his arm of envy,<br/>
Beat me with the whip of torture,<br/>
Deer-skin-lash and stalk of birch-wood.<br/>
From his couch I leaped impulsive,<br/>
In the coldest night of winter,<br/>
But the husband fleetly followed,<br/>
Caught me at the outer portals,<br/>
Grasped me by my streaming tresses,<br/>
Tore my ringlets from my forehead,<br/>
Cast in curls upon the night-winds<br/>
To the freezing winds of winter.<br/>
What the aid that I could ask for,<br/>
Who could free me from my torment?<br/>
Made I shoes of magic metals,<br/>
Made the straps of steel and copper,<br/>
Waited long without the dwelling,<br/>
Long I listened at the portals,<br/>
Hoping he would end his ravings,<br/>
Hoping he would sink to slumber,<br/>
But he did not seek for resting,<br/>
Did not wish to still his fury.<br/>
Finally the cold benumbed me;<br/>
As an outcast from his cabin,<br/>
I was forced to walk and wander,<br/>
When I, freezing, well reflected,<br/>
This the substance of my thinking:<br/>
‘I will not endure this torture,<br/>
Will not bear this thing forever,<br/>
Will not bear this cruel treatment,<br/>
Such contempt I will not suffer<br/>
In the wicked tribe of Hisi,<br/>
In this nest of evil Piru.’<br/>
“Then I said, ‘Farewell forever!’<br/>
To my husband’s home and kindred,<br/>
To my much-loved home and husband;<br/>
Started forth upon a journey<br/>
To my father’s distant hamlet,<br/>
Over swamps and over snow-fields,<br/>
Wandered over towering mountains,<br/>
Over hills and through the valleys,<br/>
To my brother’s welcome meadows,<br/>
To my sister’s home and birthplace.<br/>
“There were rustling withered pine-trees.<br/>
Finely-feathered firs were fading,<br/>
Countless ravens there were cawing,<br/>
All the jackdaws harshly singing,<br/>
This the chorus of the ravens:<br/>
‘Thou hast here a home no longer,<br/>
This is not the happy homestead<br/>
Of thy merry days of childhood.’<br/>
“Heeding not this woodland chorus,<br/>
Straight I journeyed to the dwelling<br/>
Of my childhood’s friend and brother,<br/>
Where the portals spake in concord,<br/>
And the hills and valleys answered,<br/>
This their saddened song and echo:<br/>
‘Wherefore dost thou journey hither,<br/>
Comest thou for joy or sorrow,<br/>
To thy father’s old dominions?<br/>
Here unhappiness awaits thee,<br/>
Long departed is thy father,<br/>
Dead and gone to visit Ukko,<br/>
Dead and gone thy faithful mother,<br/>
And thy brother is a stranger,<br/>
While his wife is chill and heartless!’<br/>
“Heeding not these many warnings,<br/>
Straightway to my brother’s cottage<br/>
Were my weary feet directed,<br/>
Laid my hand upon the door-latch<br/>
Of my brother’s dismal cottage,<br/>
But the latch was cold and lifeless.<br/>
When I wandered to the chamber,<br/>
When I waited at the doorway,<br/>
There I saw the heartless hostess,<br/>
But she did not give me greeting,<br/>
Did not give her hand in welcome;<br/>
Proud, alas! was I unhappy,<br/>
Did not make the first advances,<br/>
Did not offer her my friendship,<br/>
And my hand I did not proffer;<br/>
Laid my hand upon the oven,<br/>
All its former warmth departed!<br/>
On the coal I laid my fingers,<br/>
All the latent heat had left it.<br/>
On the rest-bench lay my brother,<br/>
Lay outstretched before the fire-place,<br/>
Heaps of soot upon his shoulders,<br/>
Heaps of ashes on his forehead.<br/>
Thus the brother asked the stranger,<br/>
Questioned thus his guest politely:<br/>
‘Tell me what thy name and station,<br/>
Whence thou comest o’er the waters!’<br/>
This the answer that I gave him:<br/>
Hast thou then forgot thy sister,<br/>
Does my brother not remember,<br/>
Not recall his mother’s daughter<br/>
We are children of one mother,<br/>
Of one bird were we the fledgelings,<br/>
In one nest were hatched and nurtured.’<br/>
“Then the brother fell to weeping,<br/>
From his eyes great tear-drops flowing,<br/>
To his wife the brother whispered,<br/>
Whispered thus unto the housewife.<br/>
‘Bring thou beer to give my sister,<br/>
Quench her thirst and cheer her spirits.’<br/>
“Full of envy, brought the sister<br/>
Only water filled with evil,<br/>
Water for the infant’s eyelids,<br/>
Soap and water from the bath-room.<br/>
“To his wife the brother whispered,<br/>
Whispered thus unto the housewife:<br/>
‘Bring thou salmon for my sister,<br/>
For my sister so long absent,<br/>
Thus to still her pangs of hunger.’<br/>
“Thereupon the wife obeying,<br/>
Brought, in envy, only cabbage<br/>
That the children had been eating,<br/>
And the house-dogs had been licking,<br/>
Leavings of the black-dog’s breakfast.<br/>
“Then I left my brother’s dwelling,<br/>
Hastened to the ancient homestead,<br/>
To my mother’s home deserted;<br/>
Onward, onward did I wander,<br/>
Hastened onward by the cold-sea,<br/>
Dragged my body on in anguish,<br/>
To the cottage-doors of strangers,<br/>
To the unfamiliar portals,<br/>
For the care of the neglected,<br/>
For the needy of the village,<br/>
For the children poor and orphaned.<br/>
“There are many wicked people,<br/>
Many slanderers of women,<br/>
Many women evil-minded,<br/>
That malign their sex through envy.<br/>
Many they with lips of evil,<br/>
That belie the best of maidens,<br/>
Prove the innocent are guilty<br/>
Of the worst of misdemeanors,<br/>
Speak aloud in tones unceasing,<br/>
Speak, alas! with wicked motives,<br/>
Spread the follies of their neighbors<br/>
Through the tongues of self-pollution.<br/>
Very few, indeed, the people<br/>
That will feed the poor and hungry,<br/>
That will bid the stranger welcome;<br/>
Very few to treat her kindly,<br/>
Innocent, and lone, and needy,<br/>
Few to offer her a shelter<br/>
From the chilling storms of winter,<br/>
When her skirts with ice are stiffened,<br/>
Coats of ice her only raiment!<br/>
“Never in my days of childhood,<br/>
Never in my maiden life-time,<br/>
Never would believe the story<br/>
Though a hundred tongues had told<br/>
Though a thousand voices sang it,<br/>
That such evil things could happen,<br/>
That such misery could follow,<br/>
Such misfortune could befall one<br/>
Who has tried to do her duty,<br/>
Who has tried to live uprightly,<br/>
Tried to make her people happy.”<br/>
Thus the young bride was instructed,<br/>
Beauteous Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Thus by Osmotar, the teacher.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap24"/>RUNE XXIV.<br/>
THE BRIDE’S FAREWELL.</h2>
<p>Osmotar, the bride-instructor,<br/>
Gives the wedding-guests this counsel,<br/>
Speaks these measures to the bridegroom:<br/>
“Ilmarinen, artist-brother,<br/>
Best of all my hero-brothers,<br/>
Of my mother’s sons the dearest,<br/>
Gentlest, truest, bravest, grandest,<br/>
Listen well to what I tell thee<br/>
Of the Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Of thy beauteous life-companion<br/>
Bridegroom, praise thy fate hereafter,<br/>
Praise forever thy good fortune;<br/>
If thou praisest, praise sincerely,<br/>
Good the maiden thou hast wedded,<br/>
Good the bride that Ukko gives thee,<br/>
Graciously has God bestowed her.<br/>
Sound her praises to thy father,<br/>
Praise her virtues to thy mother,<br/>
Let thy heart rejoice in secret,<br/>
That thou hast the Bride of Beauty,<br/>
Lovely Maiden of the Rainbow!<br/>
“Brilliant near thee stands the maiden,<br/>
At thy shoulder thy companion,<br/>
Happy under thy protection,<br/>
Beautiful as golden moonlight,<br/>
Beautiful upon thy bosom,<br/>
Strong to do thy kindly bidding,<br/>
Labor with thee as thou wishest,<br/>
Rake the hay upon thy meadows,<br/>
Keep thy home in full perfection,<br/>
Spin for thee the finest linen,<br/>
Weave for thee the richest fabrics,<br/>
Make for thee the softest raiment,<br/>
Make thy weaver’s loom as merry<br/>
As the cuckoo of the forest;<br/>
Make the shuttle glide in beauty<br/>
Like the ermine of the woodlands;<br/>
Make the spindle twirl as deftly<br/>
As the squirrel spins the acorn;<br/>
Village-maidens will not slumber<br/>
While thy young bride’s loom is humming,<br/>
While she plies the graceful shuttle.<br/>
“Bridegroom of the Bride of Beauty,<br/>
Noblest of the Northland heroes,<br/>
Forge thyself a scythe for mowing,<br/>
Furnish it with oaken handle,<br/>
Carve it in thine ancient smithy,<br/>
Hammer it upon thine anvil,<br/>
Have it ready for the summer,<br/>
For the merry days of sunshine;<br/>
Take thy bride then to the lowlands,<br/>
Mow the grass upon thy meadows,<br/>
Rake the hay when it is ready,<br/>
Make the reeds and grasses rustle,<br/>
Toss the fragrant heads of clover,<br/>
Make thy hay in Kalevala<br/>
When the silver sun is shining.<br/>
“When the time has come for weaving,<br/>
To the loom attract the weaver,<br/>
Give to her the spools and shuttles,<br/>
Let the willing loom be worthy,<br/>
Beautiful the frame and settle;<br/>
Give to her what may be needed,<br/>
That the weaver’s song may echo,<br/>
That the lathe may swing and rattle,<br/>
Ma y be heard within the village,<br/>
That the aged may remark it,<br/>
And the village-maidens question:<br/>
‘Who is she that now is weaving,<br/>
What new power now plies the shuttle?’<br/>
“Make this answer to the question:<br/>
‘It is my beloved weaving,<br/>
My young bride that plies the shuttle.’<br/>
“Shall the weaver’s weft be loosened,<br/>
Shall the young bride’s loom be tightened?<br/>
Do not let the weft be loosened,<br/>
Nor the weaver’s loom be tightened;<br/>
Such the weaving of the daughters<br/>
Of the Moon beyond the cloudlets;<br/>
Such the spinning of the maidens<br/>
Of the Sun in high Jumala,<br/>
Of the daughters of the Great Bear,<br/>
Of the daughters of the Evening.<br/>
Bridegroom, thou beloved hero,<br/>
Brave descendant of thy fathers,<br/>
When thou goest on a journey,<br/>
When thou drivest on the highway,<br/>
Driving with the Rainbow-daughter,<br/>
Fairest bride of Sariola,<br/>
Do not lead her as a titmouse,<br/>
As a cuckoo of the forest,<br/>
Into unfrequented places,<br/>
Into copses of the borders,<br/>
Into brier-fields and brambles,<br/>
Into unproductive marshes;<br/>
Let her wander not, nor stumble<br/>
On opposing rocks and rubbish.<br/>
Never in her father’s dwelling,<br/>
Never in her mother’s court-yard,<br/>
Has she fallen into ditches,<br/>
Stumbled hard against the fences,<br/>
Run through brier-fields, nor brambles,<br/>
Fallen over rocks, nor rubbish.<br/>
“Magic bridegroom of Wainola,<br/>
Wise descendant of the heroes,<br/>
Never let thy young wife suffer,<br/>
Never let her be neglected,<br/>
Never let her sit in darkness,<br/>
Never leave her unattended.<br/>
Never in her father’s mansion,<br/>
In the chambers of her mother,<br/>
Has she sat alone in darkness,<br/>
Has she suffered for attention;<br/>
Sat she by the crystal window,<br/>
Sat and rocked, in peace and plenty,<br/>
Evenings for her father’s pleasure,<br/>
Mornings for her mother’s sunshine.<br/>
Never mayest thou, O bridegroom,<br/>
Lead the Maiden of the Rainbow<br/>
To the mortar filled with sea-grass,<br/>
There to grind the bark for cooking,<br/>
There to bake her bread from stubble,<br/>
There to knead her dough from tan-bark<br/>
Never in her father’s dwelling,<br/>
Never in her mother’s mansion,<br/>
Was she taken to the mortar,<br/>
There to bake her bread from sea-grass.<br/>
Thou shouldst lead the Bride of Beauty<br/>
To the garner’s rich abundance,<br/>
There to draw the till of barley,<br/>
Grind the flour and knead for baking,<br/>
There to brew the beer for drinking,<br/>
Wheaten flour for honey-biscuits.<br/>
“Hero-bridegroom of Wainola,<br/>
Never cause thy Bride of Beauty<br/>
To regret her day of marriage;<br/>
Never make her shed a tear-drop,<br/>
Never fill her cup with sorrow.<br/>
Should there ever come an evening<br/>
When thy wife shall feel unhappy,<br/>
Put the harness on thy racer,<br/>
Hitch the fleet-foot to the snow-sled;<br/>
Take her to her father’s dwelling,<br/>
To the household of her mother;<br/>
Never in thy hero-lifetime,<br/>
Never while the moonbeams glimmer,<br/>
Give thy fair spouse evil treatment,<br/>
Never treat her as thy servant;<br/>
Do not bar her from the cellar,<br/>
Do not lock thy best provisions<br/>
Never in her father’s mansion,<br/>
Never by her faithful mother<br/>
Was she treated as a hireling.<br/>
Honored bridegroom of the Northland,<br/>
Proud descendant of the fathers,<br/>
If thou treatest well thy young wife,<br/>
Worthily wilt thou be treated;<br/>
When thou goest to her homestead,<br/>
When thou visitest her father,<br/>
Thou shalt meet a cordial welcome.<br/>
“Censure not the Bride of Beauty,<br/>
Never grieve thy Rainbow-maiden,<br/>
Never say in tones reproachful,<br/>
She was born in lowly station,<br/>
That her father was unworthy;<br/>
Honored are thy bride’s relations,<br/>
From an old-time tribe, her kindred;<br/>
When of corn they sowed a measure,<br/>
Each one’s portion was a kernel;<br/>
When they sowed a cask of flax-seed,<br/>
Each received a thread of linen.<br/>
Never, never, magic husband,<br/>
Treat thy beauty-bride unkindly,<br/>
Teach her not with lash of servants,<br/>
Strike her not with thongs of leather;<br/>
Never has she wept in anguish<br/>
From the birch-whip of her mother.<br/>
Stand before her like a rampart,<br/>
Be to her a strong protection,<br/>
Do not let thy mother chide her,<br/>
Let thy father not upbraid her,<br/>
Never let thy guests offend her;<br/>
Should thy servants bring annoyance,<br/>
They may need the master’s censure;<br/>
Do not harm the Bride of Beauty,<br/>
Never injure her thou lovest;<br/>
Three long years hast thou been wooing,<br/>
Hoping every mouth to win her.<br/>
“Counsel with the bride of heaven,<br/>
To thy young wife give instruction,<br/>
Kindly teach thy bride in secret,<br/>
In the long and dreary evenings,<br/>
When thou sittest at the fireside;<br/>
Teach one year, in words of kindness,<br/>
Teach with eyes of love a second,<br/>
In the third year teach with firmness.<br/>
If she should not heed thy teaching,<br/>
Should not hear thy kindly counsel<br/>
After three long years of effort,<br/>
Cut a reed upon the lowlands,<br/>
Cut a nettle from the border,<br/>
Teach thy wife with harder measures.<br/>
In the fourth year, if she heed not,<br/>
Threaten her with sterner treatment,<br/>
With the stalks of rougher edges,<br/>
Use not yet the thongs of leather,<br/>
Do not touch her with the birch-whip.<br/>
If she does not heed this warning,<br/>
Should she pay thee no attention,<br/>
Cut a rod upon the mountains,<br/>
Or a willow in the valleys,<br/>
Hide it underneath thy mantle,<br/>
That the stranger may not see it,<br/>
Show it to thy wife in secret,<br/>
Shame her thus to do her duty,<br/>
Strike not yet, though disobeying.<br/>
Should she disregard this warning,<br/>
Still refuse to heed thy wishes,<br/>
Then instruct her with the willow,<br/>
Use the birch-rod from the mountains<br/>
In the closet of thy dwelling,<br/>
In the attic of thy mansion;<br/>
Strike, her not upon the common,<br/>
Do not conquer her in public,<br/>
Lest the villagers should see thee,<br/>
Lest the neighbors hear her weeping,<br/>
And the forests learn thy troubles.<br/>
Touch thy wife upon the shoulders,<br/>
Let her stiffened back be softened.<br/>
Do not touch her on the forehead,<br/>
Nor upon the ears, nor visage;<br/>
If a ridge be on her forehead,<br/>
Or a blue mark on her eyelids,<br/>
Then her mother would perceive it,<br/>
And her father would take notice,<br/>
All the village-workmen see it,<br/>
And the village-women ask her<br/>
‘Hast thou been in heat of battle,<br/>
Hast thou struggled in a conflict,<br/>
Or perchance the wolves have torn thee,<br/>
Or the forest-bears embraced thee,<br/>
Or the black-wolf be thy husband,<br/>
And the bear be thy protector?’”<br/>
By the fire-place lay a gray-beard,<br/>
On the hearth-stone lay a beggar,<br/>
And the old man spake as follows:<br/>
“Never, never, hero-husband,<br/>
Follow thou thy young wife’s wishes,<br/>
Follow not her inclinations,<br/>
As, alas! I did, regretful;<br/>
Bought my bride the bread of barley,<br/>
Veal, and beer, and best of butter,<br/>
Fish and fowl of all descriptions,<br/>
Beer I bought, home-brewed and sparkling,<br/>
Wheat from all the distant nations,<br/>
All the dainties of the Northland;<br/>
All of this was unavailing,<br/>
Gave my wife no satisfaction,<br/>
Often came she to my chamber,<br/>
Tore my sable locks in frenzy,<br/>
With a visage fierce and frightful,<br/>
With her eyeballs flashing anger,<br/>
Scolding on and scolding ever,<br/>
Ever speaking words of evil,<br/>
Using epithets the vilest,<br/>
Thought me but a block for chopping.<br/>
Then I sought for other measures,<br/>
Used on her my last resources,<br/>
Cut a birch-whip in the forest,<br/>
And she spake in tones endearing;<br/>
Cut a juniper or willow,<br/>
And she called me ‘hero-darling’;<br/>
When with lash my wife I threatened,<br/>
Hung she on my neck with kisses.”<br/>
Thus the bridegroom was instructed,<br/>
Thus the last advices given.<br/>
Then the Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Beauteous bride of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Sighing heavily and moaning,<br/>
Fell to weeping, heavy-hearted,<br/>
Spake these words from depths of sorrow:<br/>
“Near, indeed, the separation,<br/>
Near, alas! the time for parting,<br/>
Near the time for my departure;<br/>
O the anguish of the parting,<br/>
O the pain of separation,<br/>
From these walls renowned and ancient,<br/>
From this village of the Northland,<br/>
From these scenes of peace and plenty,<br/>
Where my faithful mother taught me,<br/>
Where my father gave instruction<br/>
To me in my happy childhood,<br/>
When my years were few and tender!<br/>
As a child I did not fancy,<br/>
Never thought of separation<br/>
From the confines of this cottage,<br/>
From these dear old hills and mountains,<br/>
But, alas! I now must journey,<br/>
Since I now cannot escape it;<br/>
Empty is the bowl of parting,<br/>
All the farewell-beer is taken,<br/>
And my husband’s sledge is waiting,<br/>
With the break-board looking southward,<br/>
Looking from my father’s dwelling.<br/>
“How shall I give compensation,<br/>
How repay, on my departure,<br/>
All the kindness of my mother,<br/>
All the counsel of my father,<br/>
All the friendship of my brother,<br/>
All my sister’s warm affection?<br/>
Gratitude to thee, dear father,<br/>
For my former-life and blessings,<br/>
For the comforts of thy table,<br/>
For the pleasures of my childhood!<br/>
Gratitude to thee, dear mother,<br/>
For thy tender care and guidance,<br/>
For my birth and for my culture,<br/>
Nurtured by thy purest life-blood!<br/>
Gratitude to thee, dear brother,<br/>
Gratitude to thee, sweet sister,<br/>
To the servants of my childhood,<br/>
To my many friends and playmates!<br/>
“Never, never, aged father,<br/>
Never, thou, beloved mother,<br/>
Never, ye, my kindred spirits,<br/>
Never harbor care, nor sorrow,<br/>
Never fall to bitter weeping,<br/>
Since thy child has gone to others,<br/>
To the distant home of strangers,<br/>
To the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
From her father’s fields and firesides.<br/>
Shines the Sun of the Creator,<br/>
Shines the golden Moon of Ukko,<br/>
Glitter all the stars of heaven,<br/>
In the firmament of ether,<br/>
Full as bright on other homesteads;<br/>
Not upon my father’s uplands,<br/>
Not upon my home in childhood,<br/>
Shines the Star of Joyance only.<br/>
“Now the time has come for parting<br/>
From my father’s golden firesides,<br/>
From my brother’s welcome hearth-stone,<br/>
From the chambers of my sister,<br/>
From my mother’s happy dwelling;<br/>
Now I leave the swamps and lowlands,<br/>
Leave the grassy vales and mountains,<br/>
Leave the crystal lakes and rivers,<br/>
Leave the shores and sandy shallows,<br/>
Leave the white-capped surging billows,<br/>
Where the maidens swim and linger,<br/>
Where the mermaids sing and frolic;<br/>
Leave the swamps to those that wander,<br/>
Leave the corn-fields to the plowman,<br/>
Leave the forests to the weary,<br/>
Leave the heather to the rover,<br/>
Leave the copses to the stranger,<br/>
Leave the alleys to the beggar,<br/>
Leave the court-yards to the rambler,<br/>
Leave the portals to the servant,<br/>
Leave the matting to the sweeper,<br/>
Leave the highways to the roebuck,<br/>
Leave the woodland-glens to lynxes,<br/>
Leave the lowlands to the wild-geese,<br/>
And the birch-tree to the cuckoo.<br/>
Now I leave these friends of childhood,<br/>
Journey southward with my husband,<br/>
To the arms of Night and Winter,<br/>
O’er the ice-grown seas of Northland.<br/>
“Should I once again, returning,<br/>
Pay a visit to my tribe-folk,<br/>
Mother would not hear me calling,<br/>
Father would not see me weeping,<br/>
Calling at my mother’s grave-stone,<br/>
‘Weeping o’er my buried father,<br/>
On their graves the fragrant flowers,<br/>
Junipers and mournful willows,<br/>
Verdure from my mother’s tresses,<br/>
From the gray-beard of my father.<br/>
“Should I visit Sariola,<br/>
Visit once again these borders,<br/>
No one here would bid me welcome.<br/>
Nothing in these hills would greet me,<br/>
Save perchance a few things only,<br/>
By the fence a clump of osiers,<br/>
And a land-mark at the corner,<br/>
Which in early youth I planted,<br/>
When a child of little stature.<br/>
“Mother’s kine perhaps will know me,<br/>
Which so often I have watered,<br/>
Which I oft have fed and tended,<br/>
Lowing now at my departure,<br/>
In the pasture cold and cheerless;<br/>
Sure my mother’s kine will welcome<br/>
Northland’s daughter home returning.<br/>
Father’s steeds may not forget me,<br/>
Steeds that I have often ridden,<br/>
When a maiden free and happy,<br/>
Neighing now for me departing,<br/>
In the pasture of my brother,<br/>
In the stable of my father;<br/>
Sure my father’s steeds will know me,<br/>
Bid Pohyola’s daughter welcome.<br/>
Brother’s faithful dogs may know me,<br/>
That I oft have fed and petted,<br/>
Dogs that I have taught to frolic,<br/>
That now mourn for me departing,<br/>
In their kennels in the court-yard,<br/>
In their kennels cold and cheerless;<br/>
Sure my brother’s dogs will welcome<br/>
Pohya’s daughter home returning.<br/>
But the people will not know me,<br/>
When I come these scenes to visit,<br/>
Though the fords remain as ever,<br/>
Though unchanged remain the rivers,<br/>
Though untouched the flaxen fish-nets<br/>
On the shores await my coming.<br/>
“Fare thou well, my dear old homestead,<br/>
Fare ye well, my native bowers;<br/>
It would give me joy unceasing<br/>
Could I linger here forever.<br/>
Now farewell, ye halls and portals,<br/>
Leading to my father’s mansion;<br/>
It would give me joy unceasing<br/>
Could I linger here forever.<br/>
Fare ye well, familiar gardens<br/>
Filled with trees and fragrant flowers;<br/>
It would give me joy unceasing,<br/>
Could I linger here forever.<br/>
Send to all my farewell greetings,<br/>
To the fields, and groves, and berries;<br/>
Greet the meadows with their daisies,<br/>
Greet the borders with their fences,<br/>
Greet the lakelets with their islands,<br/>
Greet the streams with trout disporting,<br/>
Greet the hills with stately pine-trees,<br/>
And the valleys with their birches.<br/>
Fare ye well, ye streams and lakelets,<br/>
Fertile fields, and shores of ocean,<br/>
All ye aspens on the mountains,<br/>
All ye lindens of the valleys,<br/>
All ye beautiful stone-lindens,<br/>
All ye shade-trees by the cottage,<br/>
All ye junipers and willows,<br/>
All ye shrubs with berries laden,<br/>
Waving grass and fields of barley,<br/>
Arms of elms, and oaks, and alders,<br/>
Fare ye well, dear scenes of childhood,<br/>
Happiness of days departed!”<br/>
Ending thus, Pohyola’s daughter<br/>
Left her native fields and fallows,<br/>
Left the darksome Sariola,<br/>
With her husband, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Famous son of Kalevala.<br/>
But the youth remained for singing,<br/>
This the chorus of the children:<br/>
“Hither came a bird of evil’<br/>
Flew in fleetness from the forest,<br/>
Came to steal away our virgin,<br/>
Came to win the Maid of Beauty;<br/>
Took away our fairest flower,<br/>
Took our mermaid from the waters,<br/>
Won her with his youth and beauty,<br/>
With his keys of ancient wisdom.<br/>
Who will lead us to the sea-beach,<br/>
Who conduct us to the rivers?<br/>
Now the buckets will be idle,<br/>
On the hooks will rest the fish-poles,<br/>
Now unswept will lie the matting,<br/>
And unswept the halls of birch-wood,<br/>
Copper goblets be unburnished,<br/>
Dark the handles of the pitchers,<br/>
Fare thou well, dear Rainbow Maiden.”<br/>
Ilmarinen, happy bridegroom,<br/>
Hastened homeward with the daughter<br/>
Of the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
With the beauty of the Northland<br/>
Fleetly flew the hero’s snow-sledge,<br/>
Loudly creaked, and roared, and rattled<br/>
Down the banks of Northland waters,<br/>
By the side of Honey-inlet,<br/>
On the back of Sandy Mountain.<br/>
Stones went rolling from the highway,<br/>
Like the winds the sledge flew onward,<br/>
On the yoke rang hoops of iron,<br/>
Loud the spotted wood resounded,<br/>
Loudly creaked the bands of willow,<br/>
All the birchen cross-bars trembled,<br/>
And the copper-bells rang music,<br/>
In the racing of the fleet-foot,<br/>
In the courser’s gallop homeward;<br/>
Journeyed one day, then a second,<br/>
Journeyed still the third day onward,<br/>
In one hand the reins of magic,<br/>
While the other grasped the maiden,<br/>
One foot resting on the cross-bar,<br/>
And the other in the fur-robes.<br/>
Merrily the steed flew homeward,<br/>
Quickly did the highways shorten,<br/>
Till at last upon the third day,<br/>
As the sun was fast declining,<br/>
There appeared the blacksmith’s furnace,<br/>
Nearer, Ilmarinen’s dwelling,<br/>
Smoke arising high in ether,<br/>
Clouds of smoke to lofty heaven,<br/>
From the village of Wainola,<br/>
From the suitor’s forge and smithy,<br/>
From the chimneys of the hero,<br/>
From the home of the successful.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>BOOK II</h2>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap25"/>RUNE XXV.<br/>
WAINAMOINEN’S WEDDING-SONGS.</h2>
<p>At the home of Ilmarinen<br/>
Long had they been watching, waiting,<br/>
For the coming of the blacksmith,<br/>
With his bride from Sariola.<br/>
Weary were the eyes of watchers,<br/>
Waiting from the father’s portals,<br/>
Looking from the mother’s windows;<br/>
Weary were the young knees standing<br/>
At the gates of the magician;<br/>
Weary grew the feet of children,<br/>
Tramping to the walls and watching;<br/>
Worn and torn, the shoes of heroes,<br/>
Running on the shore to meet him.<br/>
Now at last upon a morning<br/>
Of a lovely day in winter,<br/>
Heard they from the woods the rumble<br/>
Of a snow-sledge swiftly bounding.<br/>
Lakko, hostess of Wainola,<br/>
She the lovely Kalew-daughter,<br/>
Spake these words in great excitement:<br/>
“’Tis the sledge of the magician,<br/>
Comes at last the metal-worker<br/>
From the dismal Sariola,<br/>
By his side the Bride of Beauty!<br/>
Welcome, welcome, to this hamlet,<br/>
Welcome to thy mother’s hearth-stone,<br/>
To the dwelling of thy father,<br/>
By thine ancestors erected!”<br/>
Straightway came great Ilmarinen<br/>
To his cottage drove the blacksmith,<br/>
To the fireside of his father,<br/>
To his mother’s ancient dwelling.<br/>
Hazel-birds were sweetly singing<br/>
On the newly-bended collar;<br/>
Sweetly called the sacred cuckoos<br/>
From the summit of the break-board;<br/>
Merry, jumped the graceful squirrel<br/>
On the oaken shafts and cross-bar.<br/>
Lakko, Kalew’s fairest hostess,<br/>
Beauteous daughter of Wainola,<br/>
Spake these words of hearty welcome:<br/>
“For the new moon hopes the village,<br/>
For the sun, the happy maidens,<br/>
For the boat, the swelling water;<br/>
I have not the moon expected,<br/>
For the sun have not been waiting,<br/>
I have waited for my hero,<br/>
Waited for the Bride of Beauty;<br/>
Watched at morning, watched at evening,<br/>
Did not know but some misfortune,<br/>
Some sad fate had overtaken<br/>
Bride and bridegroom on their journey;<br/>
Thought the maiden growing weary,<br/>
Weary of my son’s attentions,<br/>
Since he faithfully had promised<br/>
To return to Kalevala,<br/>
Ere his foot-prints had departed<br/>
From the snow-fields of his father.<br/>
Every morn I looked and listened,<br/>
Constantly I thought and wondered<br/>
When his sledge would rumble homeward,<br/>
When it would return triumphant<br/>
To his home, renowned and ancient.<br/>
Had a blind and beggared straw-horse<br/>
Hobbled to these shores awaiting,<br/>
With a sledge of but two pieces,<br/>
Well the steed would have been lauded,<br/>
Had it brought my son beloved,<br/>
Had it brought the Bride of Beauty.<br/>
Thus I waited long, impatient,<br/>
Looking out from morn till even,<br/>
Watching with my head extended,<br/>
With my tresses streaming southward,<br/>
With my eyelids widely opened,<br/>
Waiting for my son’s returning<br/>
To this modest home of heroes,<br/>
To this narrow place of resting.<br/>
Finally am I rewarded,<br/>
For the sledge has come triumphant,<br/>
Bringing home my son and hero,<br/>
By his side the Rainbow maiden,<br/>
Red her cheeks, her visage winsome,<br/>
Pride and joy of Sariola.<br/>
“Wizard-bridegroom of Wainola,<br/>
Take thy-courser to the stable,<br/>
Lead him to the well-filled manger,<br/>
To the best of grain and clover;<br/>
Give to us thy friendly greetings,<br/>
Greetings send to all thy people.<br/>
When thy greetings thou hast ended,<br/>
Then relate what has befallen<br/>
To our hero in his absence.<br/>
Hast thou gone without adventure<br/>
To the dark fields of Pohyola,<br/>
Searching for the Maid of Beauty?<br/>
Didst thou scale the hostile ramparts,<br/>
Didst thou take the virgin’s mansion,<br/>
Passing o’er her mother’s threshold,<br/>
Visiting the halls of Louhi?<br/>
“But I know without the asking,<br/>
See the answer to my question:<br/>
Comest from the North a victor,<br/>
On thy journey well contented;<br/>
Thou hast brought the Northland daughter,<br/>
Thou hast razed the hostile portals,<br/>
Thou hast stormed the forts of Louhi,<br/>
Stormed the mighty walls opposing,<br/>
On thy journey to Pohyola,<br/>
To the village of the father.<br/>
In thy care the bride is sitting,<br/>
In thine arms, the Rainbow-maiden,<br/>
At thy side, the pride of Northland,<br/>
Mated to the highly-gifted.<br/>
Who has told the cruel story,<br/>
Who the worst of news has scattered,<br/>
That thy suit was unsuccessful,<br/>
That in vain thy steed had journeyed?<br/>
Not in vain has been thy wooing,<br/>
Not in vain thy steed has travelled<br/>
To the dismal homes of Lapland;<br/>
He has journeyed heavy laden,<br/>
Shaken mane, and tail, and forelock,<br/>
Dripping foam from lips and nostrils,<br/>
Through the bringing of the maiden,<br/>
With the burden of the husband.<br/>
“Come, thou beauty, from the snow-sledge,<br/>
Come, descend thou from the cross-bench,<br/>
Do not linger for assistance,<br/>
Do not tarry to be carried;<br/>
If too young the one that lifts thee,<br/>
If too proud the one in waiting,<br/>
Rise thou, graceful, like a young bird,<br/>
Hither glide along the pathway,<br/>
On the tan-bark scarlet- colored,<br/>
That the herds of kine have evened,<br/>
That the gentle lambs have trodden,<br/>
Smoothened by the tails of horses.<br/>
Haste thou here with gentle footsteps,<br/>
Through the pathway smooth and tidy,<br/>
On the tiles of even surface,<br/>
On thy second father’s court-yard,<br/>
To thy second mother’s dwelling,<br/>
To thy brother’s place of resting,<br/>
To thy sister’s silent chambers.<br/>
Place thy foot within these portals,<br/>
Step across this waiting threshold,<br/>
Enter thou these halls of joyance,<br/>
Underneath these painted rafters,<br/>
Underneath this roof of ages.<br/>
During all the winter evenings,<br/>
Through the summer gone forever,<br/>
Sang the tiling made of ivory,<br/>
Wishing thou wouldst walk upon it;<br/>
Often sang the golden ceiling,<br/>
Hoping thou wouldst walk beneath it,<br/>
And the windows often whistled,<br/>
Asking thee to sit beside them;<br/>
Even on this merry morning,<br/>
Even on the recent evening,<br/>
Sat the aged at their windows,<br/>
On the sea-shore ran the children,<br/>
Near the walls the maidens waited,<br/>
Ran the boys upon the highway,<br/>
There to watch the young bride’s coming,<br/>
Coming with her hero-husband.<br/>
“Hail, ye courtiers of Wainola,<br/>
With the heroes of the fathers,<br/>
Hail to thee, Wainola’s hamlet,<br/>
Hail, ye halls with heroes peopled,<br/>
Hail, ye rooms with all your inmates,<br/>
Hail to thee, sweet golden moonlight,<br/>
Hail to thee, benignant Ukko,<br/>
Hail companions of the bridegroom!<br/>
Never has there been in Northland<br/>
Such a wedding-train of honor,<br/>
Never such a bride of beauty.<br/>
“Bridegroom, thou beloved hero,<br/>
Now untie the scarlet ribbons,<br/>
And remove the silken muffler,<br/>
Let us see the honey-maiden,<br/>
See the Daughter of the Rainbow.<br/>
Seven years hast thou been wooing,<br/>
Hast thou brought the maid affianced,<br/>
Wainamoinen’s Wedding-Songs.<br/>
Hast thou sought a sweeter cuckoo,<br/>
Sought one fairer than the moonlight,<br/>
Sought a mermaid from the ocean?<br/>
But I know without the asking,<br/>
See the answer to my question:<br/>
Thou hast brought the sweet-voiced cuckoo,<br/>
Thou hast found the swan of beauty<br/>
Plucked the sweetest flower of Northland,<br/>
Culled the fairest of the jewels,<br/>
Gathered Pohya’s sweetest berry!”<br/>
Sat a babe upon the matting,<br/>
And the young child spake as follows:<br/>
“Brother, what is this thou bringest,<br/>
Aspen-log or trunk of willow,<br/>
Slender as the mountain-linden?<br/>
Bridegroom, well dost thou remember,<br/>
Thou hast hoped it all thy life-time,<br/>
Hoped to bring the Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Thou a thousand times hast said it,<br/>
Better far than any other,<br/>
Not one like the croaking raven,<br/>
Nor the magpie from the border,<br/>
Nor the scarecrow from the corn-fields,<br/>
Nor the vulture from the desert.<br/>
What has this one done of credit,<br/>
In the summer that has ended?<br/>
Where the gloves that she has knitted,<br/>
Where the mittens she has woven?<br/>
Thou hast brought her empty-handed,<br/>
Not a gift she brings thy father;<br/>
In thy chests the nice are nesting,<br/>
Long-tails feeding on thy vestments,<br/>
And thy bride, cannot repair them.”<br/>
Lakko hostess of Wainola,<br/>
She the faithful Kalew-daughter,<br/>
Hears the young child’s speech in wonder,<br/>
Speaks these words of disapproval:<br/>
Silly prattler, cease thy talking,<br/>
Thou Last spoken in dishonor;<br/>
Let all others be astonished,<br/>
Reap thy malice on thy kindred,<br/>
must not harm the Bride of Beauty,<br/>
Rainbow-daughter of the Northland.<br/>
False indeed is this thy Prattle,<br/>
All thy words are full or evil,<br/>
Fallen from thy tongue of mischief<br/>
From the lips of one unworthy.<br/>
Excellent the hero’s young bride,<br/>
Best of all in Sariola,<br/>
Like the strawberry in summer,<br/>
Like the daisy from the meadow,<br/>
Like the cuckoo from the forest,<br/>
Like the bluebird from the aspen,<br/>
Like the redbreast from the heather,<br/>
Like the martin from the linden;<br/>
Never couldst thou find in Ehstland<br/>
Such a virgin as this daughter,<br/>
Such a graceful beauteous maiden,<br/>
With such dignity of Carriage,<br/>
With such arms of pearly whiteness,<br/>
With a neck so fair and lovely.<br/>
Neither is she empty-handed,<br/>
She has brought us furs abundant,<br/>
Brought us many silken garments,<br/>
Richest weavings of Pohyola.<br/>
Many beauteous things the maiden,<br/>
With the spindle has accomplished,<br/>
Spun and woven with her fingers<br/>
Dresses of the finest texture<br/>
She in winter has upfolded,<br/>
Bleached them in the days of spring-time,<br/>
Dried them at the hour of noon-day,<br/>
For our couches finest linen,<br/>
For our heads the softest pillows,<br/>
For our comfort woollen blankets,<br/>
For our necks the silken ribbons.”<br/>
To the bride speaks gracious Lakko:<br/>
“Goodly wife, thou Maid of Beauty,<br/>
Highly wert thou praised as daughter,<br/>
In thy father’s distant country;<br/>
Here thou shalt be praised forever<br/>
By the kindred of thy husband;<br/>
Thou shalt never suffer sorrow,<br/>
Never give thy heart to grieving;<br/>
In the swamps thou wert not nurtured,<br/>
Wert not fed beside the brooklets;<br/>
Thou wert born ’neath stars auspicious,<br/>
Nurtured from the richest garners,<br/>
Thou wert taken to the brewing<br/>
Of the sweetest beer in Northland.<br/>
“Beauteous bride from Sariola,<br/>
Shouldst thou see me bringing hither<br/>
Casks of corn, or wheat, or barley;<br/>
Bringing rye in great abundance,<br/>
They belong to this thy household;<br/>
Good the plowing of thy husband.<br/>
Good his sowing and his reaping.<br/>
“Bride of Beauty from the Northland,<br/>
Thou wilt learn this home to manage,<br/>
Learn to labor with thy kindred;<br/>
Good the home for thee to dwell in,<br/>
Good enough for bride and daughter.<br/>
At thy hand will rest the milk-pail,<br/>
And the churn awaits thine order;<br/>
It is well here for the maiden,<br/>
Happy will the young bride labor,<br/>
Easy are the resting-benches;<br/>
Here the host is like thy father,<br/>
Like thy mother is the hostess,<br/>
All the sons are like thy brothers,<br/>
Like thy sisters are the daughters.<br/>
“Shouldst thou ever have a longing<br/>
For the whiting of the ocean,<br/>
For thy, father’s Northland salmon,<br/>
For thy brother’s hazel-chickens,<br/>
Ask them only of thy husband,<br/>
Let thy hero-husband bring them.<br/>
There is not in all of Northland,<br/>
Not a creature of the forest,<br/>
Not a bird beneath the ether,<br/>
Not a fish within the waters,<br/>
Not the largest, nor the smallests<br/>
That thy husband cannot capture.<br/>
It is well here for the maiden,<br/>
Here the bride may live in freedom,<br/>
Need not turn the heavy millstone,<br/>
Need not move the iron pestle;<br/>
Here the wheat is ground by water,<br/>
For the rye, the swifter current,<br/>
While the billows wash the vessels<br/>
And the surging waters rinse them.<br/>
Thou hast here a lovely village,<br/>
Finest spot in all of Northland,<br/>
In the lowlands sweet the verdure,<br/>
in the uplands, fields of beauty,<br/>
With the lake-shore near the hamlet,<br/>
Near thy home the running water,<br/>
Where the goslings swim and frolic,<br/>
Water-birds disport in numbers.”<br/>
Thereupon the bride and bridegroom<br/>
Were refreshed with richest viands,<br/>
Given food and drink abundant,<br/>
Fed on choicest bits of reindeer,<br/>
On the sweetest loaves of barley,<br/>
On the best of wheaten biscuits,<br/>
On the richest beer of Northland.<br/>
Many things were on the table,<br/>
Many dainties of Wainola,<br/>
In the bowls of scarlet color,<br/>
In the platters deftly painted,<br/>
Many cakes with honey sweetened,<br/>
To each guest was butter given,<br/>
Many bits of trout and whiting,<br/>
Larger salmon carved in slices,<br/>
With the knives of molten silver,<br/>
Rimmed with gold the silver handles,<br/>
Beer of barley ceaseless flowing,<br/>
Honey-drink that was not purchased,<br/>
In the cellar flows profusely,<br/>
Beer for all, the tongues to quicken,<br/>
Mead and beer the minds to freshen.<br/>
Who is there to lead the singing,<br/>
Lead the songs of Kalevala?<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
The eternal, wise enchanter,<br/>
Quick begins his incantations,<br/>
Straightway sings the songs that follow.<br/>
“Golden brethren, dearest kindred,<br/>
Ye, my loved ones, wise and worthy<br/>
Ye companions, highly-gifted,<br/>
Listen to my simple sayings:<br/>
Rarely stand the geese together,<br/>
Sisters do not mate each other,<br/>
Not together stand the brothers,<br/>
Nor the children of one mother,<br/>
In the countries of the Northland.<br/>
“Shall we now begin the singing,<br/>
Sing the songs of old tradition?<br/>
Singers can but sing their wisdom,<br/>
And the cuckoo call the spring-time,<br/>
And the goddess of the heavens<br/>
Only dyes the earth in beauty;<br/>
So the goddesses of weaving<br/>
Can but weave from dawn till twilight,<br/>
Ever sing the youth of Lapland<br/>
In their straw-shoes full of gladness,<br/>
When the coarse-meat of the roebuck,<br/>
Or of blue-moose they have eaten.<br/>
Wherefore should I not be singing,<br/>
And the children not be chanting<br/>
Of the biscuits of Wainola,<br/>
Of the bread of Kalew-waters?<br/>
Even Sing the lads of Lapland<br/>
In their straw-shoes filled with joyance,<br/>
Drinking but a cup of water,<br/>
Eating but the bitter tan-bark.<br/>
Wherefore should I not be singing,<br/>
And the children not be chanting<br/>
Of the beer of Kalevala,<br/>
Brewed from barley in perfection,<br/>
Dressed in quaint and homely costume,<br/>
As they sit beside their hearth-stones.<br/>
Wherefore should I not be singing,<br/>
And the children too be chanting<br/>
Underneath these painted rafters,<br/>
In these halls renowned and ancient?<br/>
This the place for men to linger,<br/>
This the court-room for the maidens,<br/>
Near the foaming beer of barley,<br/>
Honey-brewed in great abundance,<br/>
Very near, the salmon-waters,<br/>
Near, the nets for trout and whiting,<br/>
Here where food is never wanting,<br/>
Where the beer is ever brewing.<br/>
Here Wainola’s sons assemble,<br/>
Here Wainola’s daughters gather,<br/>
Here they never eat in trouble,<br/>
Here they live without regretting,<br/>
In the life-time of the landlord,<br/>
While the hostess lives and prospers.<br/>
“Who shall first be sung and lauded?<br/>
Shall it be the bride or bridegroom?<br/>
Let us praise the bridegroom’s father,<br/>
Let the hero-host be chanted,<br/>
Him whose home is in the forest,<br/>
Him who built upon the mountains,<br/>
Him who brought the trunks of lindens,<br/>
With their tops and slender branches,<br/>
Brought them to the best of places,<br/>
Joined them skilfully together,<br/>
For the mansion of the nation,<br/>
For this famous hero-dwelling,<br/>
Walls procured upon the lowlands,<br/>
Rafters from the pine and fir-tree,<br/>
From the woodlands beams of oak-wood,<br/>
From the berry-plains the studding,<br/>
Bark was furnished by the aspen,<br/>
And the mosses from the fenlands.<br/>
Trimly builded is this mansion,<br/>
In a haven warmly sheltered;<br/>
Here a hundred men have labored,<br/>
On the roof have stood a thousand,<br/>
As this spacious house was building,<br/>
As this roof was tightly jointed.<br/>
Here the ancient mansion-builder,<br/>
When these rafters were erected,<br/>
Lost in storms his locks of sable,<br/>
Scattered by the winds of heaven.<br/>
Often has the hero-landlord<br/>
On the rocks his gloves forgotten,<br/>
Left his hat upon the willows,<br/>
Lost his mittens in the marshes;<br/>
Oftentimes the mansion-builder,<br/>
In the early hours of morning,<br/>
Ere his workmen had awakened,<br/>
Unperceived by all the village,<br/>
Has arisen from his slumber,<br/>
Left his cabin the snow-fields,<br/>
Combed his locks among the branches,<br/>
Bathed his eyes in dews of morning.<br/>
“Thus obtained the pleasant landlord<br/>
Friends to fill his spacious dwelling,<br/>
Fill his benches with magicians,<br/>
Fill his windows with enchanters,<br/>
Fill his halls with wizard-singers,<br/>
Fill his floors with ancient speakers,<br/>
Fill his ancient court with strangers,<br/>
Fill his hurdles with the needy;<br/>
Thus the Kalew-host is lauded.<br/>
“Now I praise the genial hostess,<br/>
Who prepares the toothsome dinner,<br/>
Fills with plenty all her tables,<br/>
Bakes the honeyed loaves of barley,<br/>
Kneads the dough with magic fingers,<br/>
With her arms of strength and beauty,<br/>
Bakes her bread in copper ovens,<br/>
Feeds her guests and bids them welcome,<br/>
Feeds them on the toothsome bacon,<br/>
On the trout, and pike, and whiting,<br/>
On the rarest fish in ocean,<br/>
On the dainties of Wainola.<br/>
“Often has the faithful hostess<br/>
Risen from her couch in silence,<br/>
Ere the crowing of the watcher,<br/>
To prepare the wedding-banquet,<br/>
Make her tables look attractive.<br/>
Brew the honey-beer of wedlock.<br/>
Excellently has the housewife,<br/>
Has the hostess filled with wisdom,<br/>
Brewed the beer from hops and barley,<br/>
From the corn of Kalevala,<br/>
From the wheat-malt honey-seasoned,<br/>
Stirred the beer with graceful fingers,<br/>
At the oven in the penthouse,<br/>
In the chamber swept and polished.<br/>
Neither did the prudent hostess,<br/>
Beautiful, and full of wisdom,<br/>
Let the barley sprout too freely,<br/>
Lest the beer should taste of black-earth,<br/>
Be too bitter in the brewing,<br/>
Often went she to the garners,<br/>
Went alone at hour of midnight,<br/>
Was not frightened by the black-wolf,<br/>
Did not fear the beasts of woodlands.<br/>
“Now the hostess I have lauded,<br/>
Let me praise the favored suitor,<br/>
Now the honored hero-bridegroom,<br/>
Best of all the village-masters.<br/>
Clothed in purple is the hero,<br/>
Raiment brought from distant nations,<br/>
Tightly fitting to his body;<br/>
Snugly sets his coat of ermine,<br/>
To the floor it hangs in beauty,<br/>
Trailing from his neck and shoulders,<br/>
Little of his vest appearing,<br/>
Peeping through his outer raiment,<br/>
Woven by the Moon’s fair daughters,<br/>
And his vestment silver-tinselled.<br/>
Dressed in neatness is the suitor,<br/>
Round his waist a belt of copper,<br/>
Hammered by the Sun’s sweet maidens,<br/>
Ere the early fires were lighted,<br/>
Ere the fire had been discovered.<br/>
Dressed in richness is the bridegroom,<br/>
On his feet are silken stockings,<br/>
Silken ribbons on his ankles,<br/>
Gold and silver interwoven.<br/>
Dressed in beauty is the bridegroom,<br/>
On his feet are shoes of deer-skin,<br/>
Like the swans upon the water,<br/>
Like the blue-duck on the sea-waves,<br/>
Like the thrush among the willows,<br/>
Like the water-birds of Northland.<br/>
Well adorned the hero-suitor,<br/>
With his locks of golden color,<br/>
With his gold-beard finely braided,<br/>
Hero-hat upon his forehead,<br/>
Piercing through the forest branches,<br/>
Reaching to the clouds of heaven,<br/>
Bought with countless gold and silver,<br/>
Priceless is the suitor’s head-gear.<br/>
“Now the bridegroom has been lauded,<br/>
I will praise the young bride’s playmate,<br/>
Day-companion in her childhood,<br/>
In the maiden’s magic mansion.<br/>
Whence was brought the merry maiden,<br/>
From the village of Tanikka?<br/>
Thence was never brought the playmate,<br/>
Playmate of the bride in childhood.<br/>
Has she come from distant nations,<br/>
From the waters of the Dwina,<br/>
O’er the ocean far-outstretching?<br/>
Not from Dwina came the maiden,<br/>
Did not sail across the waters;<br/>
Grew as berry in the mountains,<br/>
As a strawberry of sweetness,<br/>
On the fields the child of beauty,<br/>
In the glens the golden flower.<br/>
Thence has come the young bride’s playmate,<br/>
Thence arose her fair companion.<br/>
Tiny are her feet and fingers,<br/>
Small her lips of scarlet color,<br/>
Like the maiden’s loom of Suomi;<br/>
Eyes that shine in kindly beauty<br/>
Like the twinkling stars of heaven;<br/>
Beam the playmate’s throbbing temples<br/>
Like the moonlight on the waters.<br/>
Trinkets has the bride’s companion,<br/>
On her neck a golden necklace,<br/>
In her tresses, silken ribbons,<br/>
On her arms are golden bracelets,<br/>
Golden rings upon her fingers,<br/>
Pearls are set in golden ear-rings,<br/>
Loops of gold upon her temples,<br/>
And with pearls her brow is studded.<br/>
Northland thought the Moon was shining<br/>
When her jeweled ear-ringsglistened;<br/>
Thought the Sun had left his station<br/>
When her girdle shone in beauty;<br/>
Thought a ship was homeward sailing<br/>
When her colored head-gear fluttered.<br/>
Thus is praised the bride’s companion,<br/>
Playmate of the Rainbow-maiden.<br/>
“Now I praise the friends assembled,<br/>
All appear in graceful manners;<br/>
If the old are wise and silent,<br/>
All the youth are free and merry,<br/>
All the guests are fair and worthy.<br/>
Never was there in Wainola,<br/>
Never will there be in Northland,<br/>
Such a company assembled;<br/>
All the children speak in joyance,<br/>
All the aged move sedately;<br/>
Dressed in white are all the maidens,<br/>
Like the hoar-frost of the morning,<br/>
Like the welcome dawn of spring-time,<br/>
Like the rising of the daylight.<br/>
Silver then was more abundant,<br/>
Gold among the guests in plenty,<br/>
On the hills were money, pockets,<br/>
Money-bags along the valleys,<br/>
For the friends that were invited,<br/>
For the guests in joy assembled.<br/>
All the friends have now been lauded,<br/>
Each has gained his meed of honor.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Song-deliverer of Northland,<br/>
Swung himself upon the fur-bench<br/>
Or his magic sledge of copper,<br/>
Straightway hastened to his hamlet,<br/>
Singing as he journeyed onward,<br/>
Singing charms and incantations,<br/>
Singing one day, then a second,<br/>
All the third day chanting legends.<br/>
On the rocks the runners rattled,<br/>
Hung the sledge upon a birch-stump,<br/>
Broke it into many pieces,<br/>
With the magic of his singing;<br/>
Double were the runners bended,<br/>
All the parts were torn asunder,<br/>
And his magic sledge was ruined.<br/>
Then the good, old Wainamoinen<br/>
Spake these words in meditation:<br/>
“Is there one among this number,<br/>
In this rising generation,<br/>
Or perchance among the aged,<br/>
In the passing generation,<br/>
That will go to Mana’s kingdom,<br/>
To the empire of Tuoni,<br/>
There to get the magic auger<br/>
From the master of Manala,<br/>
That I may repair my snow-sledge,<br/>
Or a second sledge may fashion?”<br/>
What the younger people answered<br/>
Was the answer of the aged:<br/>
“Not among the youth of Northland,<br/>
Nor among the aged heroes,<br/>
Is there one of ample courage,<br/>
That has bravery sufficient,<br/>
To attempt the reckless journey<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
To Manala’s fields and castles,<br/>
Thence to bring Tuoni’s auger,<br/>
Wherewithal to mend thy snow-sledge,<br/>
Build anew thy sledge of magic.”<br/>
Thereupon old Wainamoinen,<br/>
The eternal wisdom-singer,<br/>
Went again to Mana’s empire,<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
Crossed the sable stream of Deathland,<br/>
To the castles of Manala,<br/>
Found the auger of Tuoni,<br/>
Brought the instrument in safety.<br/>
Straightway sings old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Sings to life a purple forest,<br/>
In the forest, slender birches,<br/>
And beside them, mighty oak-trees,<br/>
Shapes them into shafts and runners,<br/>
Moulds them by his will and power,<br/>
Makes anew his sledge of magic.<br/>
On his steed he lays the harness,<br/>
Binds him to his sledge securely,<br/>
Seats himself upon the cross-bench,<br/>
And the racer gallops homeward,<br/>
To the manger filled and waiting,<br/>
To the stable of his master;<br/>
Brings the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Famous bard and wise enchanter,<br/>
To the threshold of his dwelling,<br/>
To his home in Kalevala.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap26"/>RUNE XXVI.<br/>
ORIGIN OF THE SERPENT.</h2>
<p>Ahti, living on the island,<br/>
Near the Kauko-point and harbor,<br/>
Plowed his fields for rye and barley,<br/>
Furrowed his extensive pastures,<br/>
Heard with quickened ears an uproar,<br/>
Heard the village in commotion,<br/>
Heard a noise along the sea-shore,<br/>
Heard the foot-steps on the ice-plain,<br/>
Heard the rattle of the sledges;<br/>
Quick his mind divined the reason,<br/>
Knew it was Pohyola’s wedding,<br/>
Wedding of the Rainbow-virgin.<br/>
Quick he stopped in disappointment,<br/>
Shook his sable locks in envy,<br/>
Turned his hero-head in anger,<br/>
While the scarlet blood ceased flowing<br/>
Through his pallid face and temples;<br/>
Ceased his plowing and his sowing,<br/>
On the field he left the furrows,<br/>
On his steed he lightly mounted,<br/>
Straightway galloped fleetly homeward<br/>
To his well-beloved mother,<br/>
To his mother old and golden,<br/>
Gave his mother these directions,<br/>
These the words of Lemminkainen:<br/>
“My beloved, faithful mother,<br/>
Quickly bring me beer and viands,<br/>
Bring me food for I am hungry,<br/>
Food and drink for me abundant,<br/>
Have my bath-room quickly heated,<br/>
Quickly set the room in order,<br/>
That I may refresh my body,<br/>
Dress myself in hero-raiment.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s aged mother<br/>
Brings her hero food in plenty,<br/>
Beer and viands for the hungry,<br/>
For her thirsting son and hero;<br/>
Quick she heats the ancient bath-room,<br/>
Quickly sets his bath in order.<br/>
Then the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Ate his meat with beer inspiring,<br/>
Hastened to his bath awaiting;<br/>
Only was the bullfinch bathing,<br/>
With the many-colored bunting;<br/>
Quick the hero laved his temples,<br/>
Laved himself to flaxen whiteness,<br/>
Quick returning to his mother,<br/>
Spake in haste the words that follow:<br/>
“My beloved, helpful mother,<br/>
Go at once to yonder mountain,<br/>
To the store-house on the hill-top,<br/>
Bring my vest of finest texture,<br/>
Bring my hero-coat of purple,<br/>
Bring my suit of magic colors,<br/>
Thus to make me look attractive,<br/>
Thus to robe myself in beauty.”<br/>
First the ancient mother asked him,<br/>
Asked her son this simple question:<br/>
“Whither dost thou go, my hero?<br/>
Dost thou go to hunt the roebuck,<br/>
Chase the lynx upon the mountains,<br/>
Shoot the squirrel in the woodlands?”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Also known as Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Worthy mother of my being,<br/>
Go I not to hunt the roebuck,<br/>
Chase the lynx upon the mountains,<br/>
Shoot the squirrel on the tree-tops;<br/>
I am going to Pohyola,<br/>
To the feasting of her people.<br/>
Bring at once my purple vestments,<br/>
Straightway bring my nuptial outfit,<br/>
Let me don it for the marriage<br/>
Of the maiden of the Northland.”<br/>
But the ancient dame dissented,<br/>
And the wife forebade the husband;<br/>
Two of all the best of heroes,<br/>
Three of nature’s fairest daughters,<br/>
Strongly urged wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Not to go to Sariola,<br/>
To Pohyola’s great carousal,<br/>
To the marriage-feast of Northland,<br/>
“Since thou hast not been invited,<br/>
Since they do not wish thy presence.”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen.<br/>
These the words of Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Where the wicked are invited,<br/>
There the good are always welcome,<br/>
Herein lies my invitation;<br/>
I am constantly reminded<br/>
By this sword of sharpened edges,<br/>
By this magic blade and scabbard,<br/>
That Pohyola needs my presence.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s aged mother<br/>
Sought again to stay her hero:<br/>
“Do not go, my son beloved,<br/>
To the feasting in Pohyola;<br/>
Full of horrors are the highways,<br/>
On the road are many wonders,<br/>
Three times Death appears to frighten,<br/>
Thrice destruction hovers over!”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
These the words of Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Death is seen by aged people,<br/>
Everywhere they see perdition,<br/>
Death can never frighten heroes,<br/>
Heroes do not fear the spectre;<br/>
Be that as it may, dear mother,<br/>
Tell that I may understand thee,<br/>
Name the first of all destructions,<br/>
Name the first and last destroyers!”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“I will tell thee, son and hero,<br/>
Not because I wish to speak it,<br/>
But because the truth is worthy;<br/>
I will name the chief destruction,<br/>
Name the first of the destroyers.<br/>
When thou hast a distance journeyed,<br/>
Only one day hast thou travelled,<br/>
Comes a stream along the highway,<br/>
Stream of fire of wondrous beauty,<br/>
In the stream a mighty fire-spout,<br/>
In the spout a rock uprising,<br/>
On the rock a fiery hillock,<br/>
On the top a flaming eagle,<br/>
And his crooked beak he sharpens,<br/>
Sharpens too his bloody talons,<br/>
For the coming of the stranger,<br/>
For the people that approach him.”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Women die beneath the eagle,<br/>
Such is not the death of heroes;<br/>
Know I well a magic lotion,<br/>
That will heal the wounds of eagles;<br/>
Make myself a steed of alders,<br/>
That will walk as my companion,<br/>
That will stride ahead majestic;<br/>
As a duck I’ll drive behind him,<br/>
Drive him o’er the fatal waters,<br/>
Underneath the flaming eagle,<br/>
With his bloody beak and talons.<br/>
Worthy mother of my being,<br/>
Name the second of destroyers.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“This the second of destroyers:<br/>
When thou hast a distance wandered,<br/>
Only two clays hast thou travelled,<br/>
Comes a pit of fire to meet thee,<br/>
In the centre of the highway,<br/>
Eastward far the pit extending,<br/>
Stretches endless to the westward,<br/>
Filled with burning coals and pebbles,<br/>
Glowing with the heat of ages;<br/>
Hundreds has this monster swallowed,<br/>
In his jaws have thousands perished,<br/>
Hundreds with their trusty broadswords,<br/>
Thousands on their fiery chargers.”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Never will the hero perish<br/>
In the jaws of such a monster;<br/>
Know I well the means of safety,<br/>
Know a remedy efficient:<br/>
I will make of snow a master,<br/>
On the snow-clad fields, a hero,<br/>
Drive the snow-man on before me,<br/>
Drive him through the flaming vortex,<br/>
Drive him through the fiery furnace,<br/>
With my magic broom of copper;<br/>
I will follow in his shadow,<br/>
Follow close the magic image,<br/>
Thus escape the frightful monster,<br/>
With my golden locks uninjured,<br/>
With my flowing beard untangled.<br/>
Ancient mother of my being,<br/>
Name the last of the destructions,<br/>
Name the third of the destroyers.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“This the third of fatal dangers:<br/>
Hast thou gone a greater distance,<br/>
Hast thou travelled one day longer,<br/>
To the portals of Pohyola,<br/>
To the narrowest of gate-ways,<br/>
There a wolf will rise to meet thee,<br/>
There the black-bear sneak upon thee;<br/>
In Pohyola’s darksome portals,<br/>
Hundreds in their jaws have perished,<br/>
Have devoured a thousand heroes;<br/>
Wherefore will they not destroy thee,<br/>
Since thy form is unprotected?”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Let them eat the gentle lambkins,<br/>
Feed upon their tender tissues,<br/>
They cannot devour this hero;<br/>
I am girded with my buckler,<br/>
Girded with my belt of copper,<br/>
Armlets wear I of the master,<br/>
From the wolf and bear protected,<br/>
Will not hasten to Untamo.<br/>
I can meet the wolf of Lempo,<br/>
For the bear I have a balsam,<br/>
For his mouth I conjure bridles,<br/>
For the wolf, forge chains of iron;<br/>
I will smite them as the willow,<br/>
Chop them into little fragments,<br/>
Thus I’ll gain the open court-yard,<br/>
Thus triumphant end my journey.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“Then thy journey is not ended,<br/>
Greater dangers still await thee,<br/>
Great the wonders yet before thee,<br/>
Horrors three within thy pathway;<br/>
Three great dangers of the hero<br/>
Still await thy reckless footsteps,<br/>
These the worst of all thy dangers:<br/>
When thou hast still farther wandered,<br/>
Thou wilt reach the Court of Pohya,<br/>
Where the walls are forged from iron,<br/>
And from steel the outer bulwark;<br/>
Rises from the earth to heaven,<br/>
Back again to earth returning;<br/>
Double spears are used for railings,<br/>
On each spear are serpents winding,<br/>
On each rail are stinging adders;<br/>
Lizards too adorn the bulwarks,<br/>
Play their long tails in the sunlight,<br/>
Hissing lizards, venomed serpents,<br/>
Jump and writhe upon the rampart,<br/>
Turn their horrid heads to meet thee;<br/>
On the greensward lie the monsters,<br/>
On the ground the things of evil,<br/>
With their pliant tongues of venom,<br/>
Hissing, striking, crawling, writhing;<br/>
One more horrid than the others,<br/>
Lies before the fatal gate-way,<br/>
Longer than the longest rafters,<br/>
Larger than the largest portals;<br/>
Hisses with the tongue of anger,<br/>
Lifts his head in awful menace,<br/>
Raises it to strike none other<br/>
Than the hero of the islands.”<br/>
Spake the warlike Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:<br/>
“By such things the children perish,<br/>
Such is not the death of heroes;<br/>
Know I well the fire to manage,<br/>
I can quench the flames of passion,<br/>
I can meet the prowling wild-beasts,<br/>
Can appease the wrath of serpents,<br/>
I can heal the sting of adders,<br/>
I have plowed the serpent-pastures,<br/>
Plowed the adder-fields of Northland;<br/>
While my hands were unprotected,<br/>
Held the serpents in my fingers,<br/>
Drove the adders to Manala,<br/>
On my hands the blood of serpents,<br/>
On my feet the fat of adders.<br/>
Never will thy hero stumble<br/>
On the serpents of the Northland;<br/>
With my heel I’ll crush the monsters,<br/>
Stamp the horrid things to atoms;<br/>
I will banish them from Pohya,<br/>
Drive them to Manala’s kingdom,<br/>
Step within Pohyola’s mansion,<br/>
Walk the halls of Sariola!”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“Do not go, my son beloved,<br/>
To the firesides of Pohyola,<br/>
Through the Northland fields and fallows;<br/>
There are warriors with broadswords,<br/>
Heroes clad in mail of copper,<br/>
Are on beer intoxicated,<br/>
By the beer are much embittered;<br/>
They will charm thee, hapless creature,<br/>
On the tips of swords of magic;<br/>
Greater heroes have been conjured,<br/>
Stronger ones have been outwitted.”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Formerly thy son resided<br/>
In the hamlets of Pohyola;<br/>
Laplanders cannot enchant me,<br/>
Nor the Turyalanders harm me<br/>
I the Laplander will conjure,<br/>
Charm him with my magic powers,<br/>
Sing his shoulders wide asunder,<br/>
In his chin I’ll sing a fissure,<br/>
Sing his collar-bone to pieces,<br/>
Sing his breast to thousand fragments.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“Foolish son, ungrateful wizard,<br/>
Boasting of thy former visit,<br/>
Boasting of thy fatal journey!<br/>
Once in Northland thou wert living,<br/>
In the homesteads of Pohyola;<br/>
There thou tried to swim the whirlpool,<br/>
Tasted there the dog-tongue waters,<br/>
Floated down the fatal current,<br/>
Sank beneath its angry billows;<br/>
Thou hast seen Tuoni’s river,<br/>
Thou hast measured Mana’s waters,<br/>
There to-day thou wouldst be sleeping,<br/>
Had it not been for thy mother!<br/>
What I tell thee well remember,<br/>
Shouldst thou gain Pohyola’s chambers,<br/>
Filled with stakes thou’lt find the court-yard,<br/>
These to hold the heads of heroes;<br/>
There thy head will rest forever,<br/>
Shouldst thou go to Sariola.”<br/>
Spake the warlike Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Fools indeed may heed thy counsel,<br/>
Cowards too may give attention;<br/>
Those of seven conquest-summers<br/>
Cannot heed such weak advising.<br/>
Bring to me my battle-armor.<br/>
Bring my magic mail of copper,<br/>
Bring me too my father’s broadsword,<br/>
Keep the old man’s blade from rusting;<br/>
Long it has been cold and idle,<br/>
Long has lain in secret places,<br/>
Long and constantly been weeping,<br/>
Long been asking for a bearer.”<br/>
Then he took his mail of copper,<br/>
Took his ancient battle-armor,<br/>
Took his father’s sword of magic,<br/>
Tried its point against the oak-wood,<br/>
Tried its edge upon the sorb-tree;<br/>
In his hand the blade was bended,<br/>
Like the limber boughs of willow,<br/>
Like the juniper in summer.<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“There is none in Pohya’s hamlets,<br/>
In the courts of Sariola,<br/>
That with me can measure broadswords,<br/>
That can meet this blade ancestral.”<br/>
From the nail he took a cross-bow,<br/>
Took the strongest from the rafters,<br/>
Spake these words in meditation:<br/>
“I shall recognize as worthy,<br/>
Recognize that one a hero<br/>
That can bend this mighty cross-bow,<br/>
That can break its magic sinews,<br/>
In the hamlets of Pohyola.”<br/>
Lemminkainen, filled with courage,<br/>
Girds himself in suit of battle,<br/>
Dons his mighty mail of copper,<br/>
To his servant speaks as follows:<br/>
“Trusty slave, and whom I purchased,<br/>
Whom I bought with gold and silver,<br/>
Quick prepare my fiery charger,<br/>
Harness well my steed of battle;<br/>
I am going to the feasting,<br/>
To the banquet-fields of Lempo.”<br/>
Quick obeys the faithful servant,<br/>
Hitches well the noble war-horse,<br/>
Quick prepares the fire-red stallion,<br/>
Speaks these words when all is I ready:<br/>
“I have done what thou hast hidden,<br/>
Ready harnessed is the charger,<br/>
Waiting to obey his master.”<br/>
Comes the hour of the departing<br/>
Of the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Right hand ready, left unwilling,<br/>
All his anxious fingers pain him,<br/>
Till at last in full obedience,<br/>
All his members give permission;<br/>
Starts the hero on his journey,<br/>
While the mother gives him counsel,<br/>
At the threshold of the dwelling,<br/>
At the highway of the court-yard:<br/>
“Child of courage, my beloved,<br/>
Son of strength, my wisdom-hero,<br/>
If thou goest to the feasting,<br/>
Shouldst thou reach the great carousal,<br/>
Drink thou only a half a cupful,<br/>
Drink the goblet to the middle,<br/>
Always give the half remaining,<br/>
Give the worse half to another,<br/>
To another more unworthy;<br/>
In the lower half are serpents,<br/>
Worms, and frogs, and hissing lizards,<br/>
Feeding on the slimy bottom.”<br/>
Furthermore she tells her hero,<br/>
Gives her son these sage directions,<br/>
On the border of the court-yard,<br/>
At the portals farthest distant:<br/>
“If thou goest to the banquet,<br/>
Shouldst thou reach the great carousal,<br/>
Occupy but half the settle,<br/>
Take but half a stride in walking,<br/>
Give the second half to others,<br/>
To another less deserving;<br/>
Only thus thou’lt be a hero,<br/>
Thus become a son immortal;<br/>
In the guest-rooms look courageous,<br/>
Bravely move about the chambers,<br/>
In the gatherings of heroes,<br/>
With the hosts of magic valor.”<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Quickly leaped upon the cross-bench<br/>
Of his battle-sledge of wonder,<br/>
Raised his pearl-enamelled birch-rod,<br/>
Snapped his whip above his charger,<br/>
And the steed flew onward fleetly,<br/>
Galloped on his distant journey.<br/>
He had travelled little distance,<br/>
When a flight of hazel-chickens<br/>
Quick arose before his coming,<br/>
Flew before the foaming racer.<br/>
There were left some feathers lying,<br/>
Feathers of the hazel-chickens,<br/>
Lying in the hero’s pathway.<br/>
These the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Gathered for their magic virtues,<br/>
Put them in his pouch of leather,<br/>
Did not know what things might happen<br/>
On his journey to Pohyola;<br/>
All things have some little value,<br/>
In a strait all things are useful.<br/>
Then he drove a little distance,<br/>
Galloped farther on the highway,<br/>
When his courser neighed in danger,<br/>
And the fleet-foot ceased his running.<br/>
Then the stout-heart, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Rose upon his seat in wonder,<br/>
Craned his neck and looked about him<br/>
Found it as his mother told him,<br/>
Found a stream of fire opposing;<br/>
Ran the fire-stream like a river,<br/>
Ran across the hero’s pathway.<br/>
In the river was a fire-fall,<br/>
In the cataract a fire-rock,<br/>
On the rock a fiery hillock,<br/>
On its summit perched an eagle,<br/>
From his throat the fire was streaming<br/>
To the crater far below him,<br/>
Fire out-shooting from his feathers,<br/>
Glowing with a fiery splendor;<br/>
Long he looked upon the hero,<br/>
Long he gazed on Lemminkainen,<br/>
Then the eagle thus addressed him:<br/>
“Whither art thou driving, Ahti,<br/>
Whither going, Lemminkainen?”<br/>
Kaukomieli spake in answer:<br/>
“To the feastings of Pohyola,<br/>
To the drinking-halls of Louhi,<br/>
To the banquet of her people;<br/>
Move aside and let me journey,<br/>
Move a little from my pathway,<br/>
Let this wanderer pass by thee,<br/>
I am warlike Lemminkainen.”<br/>
This the answer of the eagle,<br/>
Screaming from his throat of splendor:<br/>
“Though thou art wild Lemminkainen,<br/>
I shall let thee wander onward,<br/>
Through my fire-throat let thee journey,<br/>
Through these flames shall be thy passage<br/>
To the banquet-halls of Louhi,<br/>
To Pohyola’s great carousal!”<br/>
Little heeding, Kaukomieli<br/>
Thinks himself in little trouble,<br/>
Thrusts his fingers in his pockets,<br/>
Searches in his pouch of leather,<br/>
Quickly takes the magic feathers,<br/>
Feathers from the hazel-chickens,<br/>
Rubs them into finest powder,<br/>
Rubs them with his magic fingers<br/>
Whence a flight of birds arises,<br/>
Hazel-chickens from the feathers,<br/>
Large the bevy of the young birds.<br/>
Quick the wizard, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Drives them to the eagle’s fire-mouth,<br/>
Thus to satisfy his hunger,<br/>
Thus to quench the fire out-streaming.<br/>
Thus escapes the reckless hero,<br/>
Thus escapes the first of dangers,<br/>
Passes thus the first destroyer,<br/>
On his journey to Pohyola.<br/>
With his whip he strikes his courser,<br/>
With his birch-whip, pearl-enamelled;<br/>
Straightway speeds the fiery charger,<br/>
Noiselessly upon his journey,<br/>
Gallops fast and gallops faster,<br/>
Till the flying steed in terror<br/>
Neighs again and ceases running.<br/>
Lemminkainen, quickly rising,<br/>
Cranes his neck and looks about him,<br/>
Sees his mother’s words were truthful,<br/>
Sees her augury well-taken.<br/>
Lo! before him yawned a fire-gulf,<br/>
Stretching crosswise through his pathway;<br/>
Far to east the gulf extending,<br/>
To the west an endless distance,<br/>
Filled with stones and burning pebbles,<br/>
Running streams of burning matter.<br/>
Little heeding, Lemminkainen<br/>
Cries aloud in prayer to Ukko:<br/>
“Ukko, thou O God above me,<br/>
Dear Creator, omnipresent,<br/>
From the north-west send a storm-cloud,<br/>
From the east, dispatch a second,<br/>
From the south send forth a third one;<br/>
Let them gather from the south-west,<br/>
Sew their edges well together,<br/>
Fill thou well the interspaces,<br/>
Send a snow-fall high as heaven,<br/>
Let it fall from upper ether,<br/>
Fall upon the flaming fire-pit,<br/>
On the cataract and whirlpool!”<br/>
Mighty Ukko, the Creator,<br/>
Ukko, father omnipresent,<br/>
Dwelling in the courts of heaven,<br/>
Sent a storm-cloud from the north-west,<br/>
From the east he sent a second,<br/>
From the south despatched a third one,<br/>
Let them gather from the south-west,<br/>
Sewed their edges well together,<br/>
Filled their many interspaces,<br/>
Sent a snow-fall high as heaven,<br/>
From the giddy heights of ether,<br/>
Sent it seething to the fire-pit,<br/>
On the streams of burning matter;<br/>
From the snow-fall in the fire-pond,<br/>
Grows a lake with rolling billows.<br/>
Quick the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Conjures there of ice a passage<br/>
From one border to the other,<br/>
Thus escapes his second danger,<br/>
Thus his second trouble passes.<br/>
Then the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Raised his pearl-enamelled birch-rod,<br/>
Snapped his whip above his racer,<br/>
And the steed flew onward swiftly,<br/>
Galloped on his distant journey<br/>
O’er the highway to Pohyola;<br/>
Galloped fast and galloped faster,<br/>
Galloped on a greater distance,<br/>
When the stallion loudly neighing,<br/>
Stopped and trembled on the highway,<br/>
Then the lively Lemminkainen<br/>
Raised himself upon the cross-bench,<br/>
Looked to see what else had happened;<br/>
Lo I a wolf stands at the portals,<br/>
in the passage-way a black-bear,<br/>
At the high-gate of Pohyola,<br/>
At the ending of the journey.<br/>
Thereupon young Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Thrusts his fingers in his pockets,<br/>
Seeks his magic pouch of leather,<br/>
Pulls therefrom a lock of ewe-wool,<br/>
Rubs it firmly in his fingers,<br/>
In his hands it falls to powder;<br/>
Breathes the breath of life upon it,<br/>
When a flock of sheep arises,<br/>
Goats and sheep of sable color;<br/>
On the flock the black-wolf pounces,<br/>
And the wild-bear aids the slaughter,<br/>
While the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Rushes by them on his journey;<br/>
Gallops on a little distance,<br/>
To the court of Sariola,<br/>
Finds the fence of molten iron,<br/>
And of steel the rods and pickets,<br/>
In the earth a hundred fathoms,<br/>
To the azure sky, a thousand,<br/>
Double-pointed spears projecting;<br/>
On each spear were serpents twisted,<br/>
Adders coiled in countless numbers,<br/>
Lizards mingled with the serpents,<br/>
Tails entangled pointing earthward,<br/>
While their heads were skyward whirling,<br/>
Writhing, hissing mass of evil.<br/>
Then the stout-heart, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Deeply thought and long considered:<br/>
“It is as my mother told me,<br/>
This the wall that she predicted,<br/>
Stretching from the earth to heaven;<br/>
Downward deep are serpents creeping,<br/>
Deeper still the rails extending;<br/>
High as highest flight of eagles,<br/>
Higher still the wall shoots upward.”<br/>
But the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Little cares, nor feels disheartened,<br/>
Draws his broadsword from its scabbard,<br/>
Draws his mighty blade ancestral,<br/>
Hews the wall with might of magic,<br/>
Breaks the palisade in pieces,<br/>
Hews to atoms seven pickets,<br/>
Chops the serpent-wall to fragments;<br/>
Through the breach he quickly passes<br/>
To the portals of Pohyola.<br/>
In the way, a serpent lying,<br/>
Lying crosswise in the entry,<br/>
Longer than the longest rafters,<br/>
Larger than the posts of oak-wood;<br/>
Hundred-eyed, the heinous serpent,<br/>
And a thousand tongues, the monster,<br/>
Eyes as large as sifting vessels,<br/>
Tongues as long as shafts of javelins,<br/>
Teeth as large as hatchet-handles,<br/>
Back as broad as skiffs of ocean.<br/>
Lemminkainen does not venture<br/>
Straightway through this host opposing,<br/>
Through the hundred heads of adders,<br/>
Through the thousand tongues of serpents.<br/>
Spake the magic Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Venomed viper, thing of evil,<br/>
Ancient adder of Tuoni,<br/>
Thou that crawlest in the stubble,<br/>
Through the flower-roots of Lempo,<br/>
Who has sent thee from thy kingdom,<br/>
Sent thee from thine evil coverts,<br/>
Sent thee hither, crawling, writhing,<br/>
In the pathway I would travel?<br/>
Who bestowed thy mouth of venom,<br/>
Who insisted, who commanded,<br/>
Thou shouldst raise thy head toward heaven,<br/>
Who thy tail has given action?<br/>
Was this given by the father,<br/>
Did the mother give this power,<br/>
Or the eldest of the brothers,<br/>
Or the youngest of the sisters,<br/>
Or some other of thy kindred?<br/>
“Close thy mouth, thou thing of evil,<br/>
Hide thy pliant tongue of venom,<br/>
In a circle wrap thy body,<br/>
Coil thou like a shield in silence,<br/>
Give to me one-half the pathway,<br/>
Let this wanderer pass by thee,<br/>
Or remove thyself entirely;<br/>
Get thee hence to yonder heather,<br/>
Quick retreat to bog and stubble,<br/>
Hide thyself in reeds and rushes,<br/>
In the brambles of the lowlands.<br/>
Like a ball of flax enfolding,<br/>
Like a sphere of aspen-branches,<br/>
With thy head and tail together,<br/>
Roll thyself to yonder mountain;<br/>
In the heather is thy dwelling,<br/>
Underneath the sod thy caverns.<br/>
Shouldst thou raise thy head in anger,<br/>
Mighty Ukko will destroy it,<br/>
Pierce it with his steel-tipped arrows,<br/>
With his death-balls made of iron!”<br/>
Hardly had the hero ended,<br/>
When the monster, little heeding,<br/>
Hissing with his tongue in anger,<br/>
Plying like the forked lightning,<br/>
Pounces with his mouth of venom<br/>
At the head of Lemminkainen;<br/>
But the hero, quick recalling,<br/>
Speaks the master-words of knowledge,<br/>
Words that came from distant ages,<br/>
Words his ancestors had taught him,<br/>
Words his mother learned in childhood,<br/>
These the words of Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Since thou wilt not heed mine order,<br/>
Since thou wilt not leave the highway,<br/>
Puffed with pride of thine own greatness,<br/>
Thou shall burst in triple pieces.<br/>
Leave thy station for the borders,<br/>
I will hunt thine ancient mother,<br/>
Sing thine origin of evil,<br/>
How arose thy head of horror;<br/>
Suoyatar, thine ancient mother,<br/>
Thing of evil, thy creator!”<br/>
“Suoyatar once let her spittle<br/>
Fall upon the waves of ocean;<br/>
This was rocked by winds and waters,<br/>
Shaken by the ocean-currents,<br/>
Six years rocked upon the billows,<br/>
Rocked in water seven summers,<br/>
On the blue-back of the ocean,<br/>
On the billows high as heaven;<br/>
Lengthwise did the billows draw it,<br/>
And the sunshine gave it softness,<br/>
To the shore the billows washed it,<br/>
On the coast the waters left it.<br/>
“Then appeared Creation’s daughters,<br/>
Three the daughters thus appearing,<br/>
On the roaring shore of ocean,<br/>
There beheld the spittle lying,<br/>
And the daughters spake as follows:<br/>
‘What would happen from this spittle,<br/>
Should the breath of the Creator<br/>
Fall upon the writhing matter,<br/>
Breathe the breath of life upon it,<br/>
Give the thing the sense of vision?<br/>
“The Creator heard these measures,<br/>
Spake himself the words that follow:<br/>
‘Evil only comes from evil,<br/>
This is the expectoration<br/>
Of fell Suoyatar, its mother;<br/>
Therefore would the thing be evil,<br/>
Should I breathe a soul within it,<br/>
Should I give it sense of vision.’<br/>
“Hisi heard this conversation,<br/>
Ever ready with his mischief,<br/>
Made himself to be creator,<br/>
Breathed a soul into the spittle,<br/>
To fell Suoyatar’s fierce anger.<br/>
Thus arose the poison-monster,<br/>
Thus was born the evil serpent,<br/>
This the origin of evil.<br/>
“Whence the life that gave her action’?<br/>
From the carbon-pile of Hisi.<br/>
Whence then was her heart created?<br/>
From the heart-throbs of her mother<br/>
Whence arose her brain of evil?<br/>
From the foam of rolling waters.<br/>
Whence was consciousness awakened?<br/>
From the waterfall’s commotion.<br/>
Whence arose her head of venom?<br/>
From the seed-germs of the ivy.<br/>
Whence then came her eyes of fury?<br/>
From the flaxen seeds of Lempo.<br/>
Whence the evil ears for hearing?<br/>
From the foliage of Hisi.<br/>
Whence then was her mouth created?<br/>
This from Suoyatar’s foam-currents<br/>
Whence arose thy tongue of anger r<br/>
From the spear of Keitolainen.<br/>
Whence arose thy fangs of poison?<br/>
From the teeth of Mana’s daughter.<br/>
Whence then was thy back created?<br/>
From the carbon-posts of Piru.<br/>
How then was thy tail created?<br/>
From the brain of the hobgoblin.<br/>
Whence arose thy writhing entrails?<br/>
From the death-belt of Tuoni.<br/>
“This thine origin, O Serpent,<br/>
This thy charm of evil import,<br/>
Vilest thing of God’s creation,<br/>
Writhing, hissing thing of evil,<br/>
With the color of Tuoni,<br/>
With the shade of earth and heaven,<br/>
With the darkness of the storm-cloud.<br/>
Get thee hence, thou loathsome monster,<br/>
Clear the pathway of this hero.<br/>
I am mighty Lemminkainen,<br/>
On my journey to Pohyola,<br/>
To the feastings and carousals,<br/>
In the halls of darksome Northland.”<br/>
Thereupon the snake uncoiling,<br/>
Hundred-eyed and heinous monster,<br/>
Crawled away to other portals,<br/>
That the hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Might proceed upon his errand,<br/>
To the dismal Sariola,<br/>
To the feastings and carousals<br/>
In the banquet-halls of Pohya.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap27"/>RUNE XXVII.<br/>
THE UNWELCOME GUEST.</h2>
<p>I have brought young Kaukomieli,<br/>
Brought the Islander and hero,<br/>
Also known as Lemminkainen,<br/>
Through the jaws of death and ruin,<br/>
Through the darkling deeps of Kalma,<br/>
To the homesteads of Pohyola,<br/>
To the dismal courts of Louhi;<br/>
Now must I relate his doings,<br/>
Must relate to all my bearers,<br/>
How the merry Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Wandered through Pohyola’s chambers,<br/>
Through the halls of Sariola,<br/>
How the hero went unbidden<br/>
To the feasting and carousal,<br/>
Uninvited to the banquet.<br/>
Lemminkainen full of courage,<br/>
Full of life, and strength, and magic.<br/>
Stepped across the ancient threshold,<br/>
To the centre of the court-room,<br/>
And the floors of linwood trembled,<br/>
Walls and ceilings creaked and murmured.<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
These the words that Ahti uttered:<br/>
“Be ye greeted on my coming,<br/>
Ye that greet, be likewise greeted!<br/>
Listen, all ye hosts of Pohya;<br/>
Is there food about this homestead,<br/>
Barley for my hungry courser,<br/>
Beer to give a thirsty stranger?<br/>
Sat the host of Sariola<br/>
At the east end of the table,<br/>
Gave this answer to the questions:<br/>
“Surely is there in this homestead,<br/>
For thy steed an open stable,<br/>
Never will this host refuse thee,<br/>
Shouldst thou act a part becoming,<br/>
Worthy, coming to these portals,<br/>
Waiting near the birchen rafters,<br/>
In the spaces by the kettles,<br/>
By the triple hooks of iron.”<br/>
Then the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Shook his sable locks and answered:<br/>
“Lempo may perchance come hither,<br/>
Let him fill this lowly station,<br/>
Let him stand between the kettles,<br/>
That with soot he may be blackened.<br/>
Never has my ancient father,<br/>
Never has the dear old hero,<br/>
Stood upon a spot unworthy,<br/>
At the portals near the rafters;<br/>
For his steed the best of stables,<br/>
Food and shelter gladly furnished,<br/>
And a room for his attendants,<br/>
Corners furnished for his mittens,<br/>
Hooks provided for his snow-shoes,<br/>
Halls in waiting for his helmet.<br/>
Wherefore then should I not find here<br/>
What my father found before me?”<br/>
To the centre walked the hero,<br/>
Walked around the dining table,<br/>
Sat upon a bench and waited,<br/>
On a bench of polished fir-wood,<br/>
And the kettle creaked beneath him.<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“As a guest am I unwelcome,<br/>
Since the waiters bring no viands,<br/>
Bring no dishes to the stranger?”<br/>
Ilpotar, the Northland hostess,<br/>
Then addressed the words that follow:<br/>
“Lemminkainen, thou art evil,<br/>
Thou art here, but not invited,<br/>
Thou hast not the look of kindness,<br/>
Thou wilt give me throbbing temples,<br/>
Thou art bringing pain and sorrow.<br/>
All our beer is in the barley,<br/>
All the malt is in the kernel,<br/>
All our grain is still ungarnered,<br/>
And our dinner has been eaten;<br/>
Yesterday thou shouldst have been here,<br/>
Come again some future season.”<br/>
Whereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Pulled his mouth awry in anger,<br/>
Shook his coal-black locks and answered:<br/>
“All the tables here are empty,<br/>
And the feasting-time is over;<br/>
All the beer has left the goblets,<br/>
Empty too are all the pitchers,<br/>
Empty are the larger vessels.<br/>
O thou hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Toothless dame of dismal Northland,<br/>
Badly managed is thy wedding,<br/>
And thy feast is ill-conducted,<br/>
Like the dogs hast thou invited;<br/>
Thou hast baked the honey-biscuit,<br/>
Wheaten loaves of greatest virtue,<br/>
Brewed thy beer from hops and barley,<br/>
Sent abroad thine invitations,<br/>
Six the hamlets thou hast honored,<br/>
Nine the villages invited<br/>
By thy merry wedding-callers.<br/>
Thou hast asked the poor and lowly,<br/>
Asked the hosts of common people,<br/>
Asked the blind, and deaf, and crippled,<br/>
Asked a multitude of beggars,<br/>
Toilers by the day, and hirelings;<br/>
Asked the men of evil habits,<br/>
Asked the maids with braided tresses,<br/>
I alone was not invited.<br/>
How could such a slight be given,<br/>
Since I sent thee kegs of barley?<br/>
Others sent thee grain in cupfuls,<br/>
Brought it sparingly in dippers,<br/>
While I sent thee fullest measure,<br/>
Sent the half of all my garners,<br/>
Of the richest of my harvest,<br/>
Of the grain that I had gathered.<br/>
Even now young Lemminkainen,<br/>
Though a guest of name and station<br/>
Has no beer, no food, no welcome,<br/>
Naught for him art thou preparing,<br/>
Nothing cooking in thy kettles,<br/>
Nothing brewing in thy cellars<br/>
For the hero of the Islands,<br/>
At the closing of his journey.”<br/>
Ilpotar, the ancient hostess,<br/>
Gave this order to her servants:<br/>
“Come, my pretty maiden-waiter,<br/>
Servant-girl to me belonging,<br/>
Lay some salmon to the broiling,<br/>
Bring some beer to give the stranger!”<br/>
Small of stature was the maiden,<br/>
Washer of the banquet-platters,<br/>
Rinser of the dinner-ladles,<br/>
Polisher of spoons of silver,<br/>
And she laid some food in kettles,<br/>
Only bones and beads of whiting,<br/>
Turnip-stalks and withered cabbage,<br/>
Crusts of bread and bits of biscuit.<br/>
Then she brought some beer in pitchers,<br/>
Brought of common drink the vilest,<br/>
That the stranger, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Might have drink, and meat in welcome,<br/>
Thus to still his thirst and hunger.<br/>
Then the maiden spake as follows:<br/>
“Thou art sure a mighty hero,<br/>
Here to drink the beer of Pohya,<br/>
Here to empty all our vessels!”<br/>
Then the minstrel, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Closely handled all the pitchers,<br/>
Looking to the very bottoms;<br/>
There beheld he writhing serpents,<br/>
In the centre adders swimming,<br/>
On the borders worms and lizards.<br/>
Then the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Filled with anger, spake as follows:<br/>
Get ye hence, ye things of evil,<br/>
Get ye hence to Tuonela,<br/>
With the bearer of these pitchers,<br/>
With the maid that brought ye hither,<br/>
Ere the evening moon has risen,<br/>
Ere the day-star seeks the ocean!<br/>
O thou wretched beer of barley,<br/>
Thou hast met with great dishonor,<br/>
Into disrepute hast fallen,<br/>
But I’ll drink thee, notwithstanding,<br/>
And the rubbish cast far from me.”<br/>
Then the hero to his pockets<br/>
Thrust his first and unnamed finger,<br/>
Searching in his pouch of leather;<br/>
Quick withdraws a hook for fishing,<br/>
Drops it to the pitcher’s bottom,<br/>
Through the worthless beer of barley;<br/>
On his fish-book hang the serpents,<br/>
Catches many hissing adders,<br/>
Catches frogs in magic numbers,<br/>
Catches blackened worms in thousands,<br/>
Casts them to the floor before him,<br/>
Quickly draws his heavy broad sword,<br/>
And decapitates the serpents.<br/>
Now he drinks the beer remaining,<br/>
When the wizard speaks as follows:<br/>
“As a guest am I unwelcome,<br/>
Since no beer to me is given<br/>
That is worthy of a hero;<br/>
Neither has a ram been butchered,<br/>
Nor a fattened calf been slaughtered,<br/>
Worthy food for Lemminkainen.”<br/>
Then the landlord of Pohyola<br/>
Answered thus the Island-minstrel:<br/>
“Wherefore hast thou journeyed hither,<br/>
Who has asked thee for thy presence?<br/>
Spake in answer Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Happy is the guest invited,<br/>
Happier when not expected;<br/>
Listen, son of Pohylander,<br/>
Host of Sariola, listen:<br/>
Give me beer for ready payment,<br/>
Give me worthy drink for money!”<br/>
Then the landlord of Pohyola,<br/>
In bad humor, full of anger,<br/>
Conjured in the earth a lakelet,<br/>
At the feet of Kaukomieli,<br/>
Thus addressed the Island-hero:<br/>
“Quench thy thirst from yonder lakelet,<br/>
There, the beer that thou deservest!”<br/>
Little heeding, Lemminkainen<br/>
To this insolence made answer:<br/>
“I am neither bear nor roebuck,<br/>
That should drink this filthy water,<br/>
Drink the water of this lakelet.”<br/>
Ahti then began to conjure,<br/>
Conjured he a bull before him,<br/>
Bull with horns of gold and silver,<br/>
And the bull drank from the lakelet,<br/>
Drank he from the pool in pleasure.<br/>
Then the landlord of Pohyola<br/>
There a savage wolf created,<br/>
Set him on the floor before him<br/>
To destroy the bull of magic,<br/>
Lemminkainen, full of courage,<br/>
Conjured up a snow-white rabbit,<br/>
Set him on the floor before him<br/>
To attract the wolf’s attention.<br/>
Then the landlord of Pohyola<br/>
Conjured there a dog of Lempo,<br/>
Set him on the floor before him<br/>
To destroy the magic rabbit.<br/>
Lemminkainen, full of mischief,<br/>
Conjured on the roof a squirrel,<br/>
That by jumping on the rafters<br/>
He might catch the dog’s attention.<br/>
But the master of the Northland<br/>
Conjured there a golden marten,<br/>
And he drove the magic squirrel<br/>
From his seat upon the rafters.<br/>
Lemminkainen, full of mischief,<br/>
Made a fox of scarlet color,<br/>
And it ate the golden marten.<br/>
Then the master of Pohyola<br/>
Conjured there a hen to flutter<br/>
Near the fox of scarlet color.<br/>
Lemminkainen, full of mischief,<br/>
Thereupon a hawk created,<br/>
That with beak and crooked talons<br/>
He might tear the hen to pieces.<br/>
Spake the landlord of Pohyola,<br/>
These the words the tall man uttered:<br/>
“Never will this feast be bettered<br/>
Till the guests are less in number;<br/>
I must do my work as landlord,<br/>
Get thee hence, thou evil stranger,<br/>
Cease thy conjurings of evil,<br/>
Leave this banquet of my people,<br/>
Haste away, thou wicked wizard,<br/>
To thine Island-home and people!<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Thus no hero will be driven,<br/>
Not a son of any courage<br/>
Will be frightened by thy presence,<br/>
Will be driven from thy banquet.”<br/>
Then the landlord of Pohyola<br/>
Snatched his broadsword from the rafters,<br/>
Drew it rashly from the scabbard,<br/>
Thus addressing Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Ahti, Islander of evil,<br/>
Thou the handsome Kaukomieli,<br/>
Let us measure then our broadswords,<br/>
Let our skill be fully tested;<br/>
Surely is my broadsword better<br/>
Than the blade within thy scabbard.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen.<br/>
“That my blade is good and trusty,<br/>
Has been proved on heads of heroes,<br/>
Has on many bones been tested;<br/>
Be that as it may, my fellow,<br/>
Since thine order is commanding,<br/>
Let our swords be fully tested,<br/>
Let us see whose blade is better.<br/>
Long ago my hero-father<br/>
Tested well this sword in battle,<br/>
Never failing in a conflict.<br/>
Should his son be found less worthy?”<br/>
Then he grasped his mighty broadsword,<br/>
Drew the fire-blade from the scabbard<br/>
Hanging from his belt of copper.<br/>
Standing on their hilts their broadswords,<br/>
Carefully their blades were measured,<br/>
Found the sword of Northland’s master<br/>
Longer than the sword of Ahti<br/>
By the half-link of a finger.<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen.<br/>
“Since thou hast the longer broadsword,<br/>
Thou shalt make the first advances,<br/>
I am ready for thy weapon.”<br/>
Thereupon Pohyola’s landlord<br/>
With the wondrous strength of anger,<br/>
Tried in vain to slay the hero,<br/>
Strike the crown of Lemminkainen;<br/>
Chipped the splinters from the rafters,<br/>
Cut the ceiling into fragments,<br/>
Could not touch the Island-hero.<br/>
Thereupon brave Kaukomieli,<br/>
Thus addressed Pohyola’s master:<br/>
“Have the rafters thee offended?<br/>
What the crimes they have committed,<br/>
Since thou hewest them in pieces?<br/>
Listen now, thou host of Northland,<br/>
Reckless landlord of Pohyola,<br/>
Little room there is for swordsmen<br/>
In these chambers filled with women;<br/>
We shall stain these painted rafters,<br/>
Stain with blood these floors and ceilings;<br/>
Let us go without the mansion,<br/>
In the field is room for combat,<br/>
On the plain is space sufficient;<br/>
Blood looks fairer in the court-yard,<br/>
Better in the open spaces,<br/>
Let it dye the snow-fields scarlet.”<br/>
To the yard the heroes hasten,<br/>
There they find a monstrous ox-skin,<br/>
Spread it on the field of battle;<br/>
On the ox-skin stand the swordsmen.<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Listen well, thou host of Northland,<br/>
Though thy broadsword is the longer,<br/>
Though thy blade is full of horror,<br/>
Thou shalt have the first advantage;<br/>
Use with skill thy boasted broadsword<br/>
Ere the final bout is given,<br/>
Ere thy head be chopped in pieces;<br/>
Strike with skill, or thou wilt perish,<br/>
Strike, and do thy best for Northland.”<br/>
Thereupon Pohyola’s landlord<br/>
Raised on high his blade of battle,<br/>
Struck a heavy blow in anger,<br/>
Struck a second, then a third time,<br/>
But he could not touch his rival,<br/>
Could Dot draw a single blood-drop<br/>
From the veins of Lemminkainen,<br/>
Skillful Islander and hero.<br/>
Spake the handsome Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Let me try my skill at fencing,<br/>
Let me swing my father’s broadsword,<br/>
Let my honored blade be tested!”<br/>
But the landlord of Pohyola,<br/>
Does not heed the words of Ahti,<br/>
Strikes in fury, strikes unceasing,<br/>
Ever aiming, ever missing.<br/>
When the skillful Lemminkainen<br/>
Swings his mighty blade of magic,<br/>
Fire disports along his weapon,<br/>
Flashes from his sword of honor,<br/>
Glistens from the hero’s broadsword,<br/>
Balls of fire disporting, dancing,<br/>
On the blade of mighty Ahti,<br/>
Overflow upon the shoulders<br/>
Of the landlord of Pohyola.<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“O thou son of Sariola,<br/>
See! indeed thy neck is glowing<br/>
Like the dawning of the morning,<br/>
Like the rising Sun in ocean!”<br/>
Quickly turned Pohyola’s landlord,<br/>
Thoughtless host of darksome Northland,<br/>
To behold the fiery splendor<br/>
Playing on his neck and shoulders.<br/>
Quick as lightning, Lemminkainen,<br/>
With his father’s blade of battle,<br/>
With a single blow of broadsword,<br/>
With united skill and power,<br/>
Lopped the head of Pohya’s master;<br/>
As one cleaves the stalks of turnips,<br/>
As the ear falls from the corn-stalk,<br/>
As one strikes the fins from salmon,<br/>
Thus the head rolled from the shoulders<br/>
Of the landlord of Pohyola,<br/>
Like a ball it rolled and circled.<br/>
In the yard were pickets standing,<br/>
Hundreds were the sharpened pillars,<br/>
And a head on every picket,<br/>
Only one was left un-headed.<br/>
Quick the victor, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Took the head of Pohya’s landlord,<br/>
Spiked it on the empty picket.<br/>
Then the Islander, rejoicing,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Quick returning to the chambers,<br/>
Crave this order to the hostess:<br/>
“Evil maiden, bring me water,<br/>
Wherewithal to cleanse my fingers<br/>
From the blood of Northland’s master,<br/>
Wicked host of Sariola.”<br/>
Ilpotar, the Northland hostess,<br/>
Fired with anger, threatened vengeance,<br/>
Conjured men with heavy broadswords,<br/>
Heroes clad in copper-armor,<br/>
Hundred warriors with their javelins,<br/>
And a thousand bearing cross-bows,<br/>
To destroy the Island-hero,<br/>
For the death of Lemminkainen.<br/>
Kaukomieli soon discovered<br/>
That the time had come for leaving,<br/>
That his presence was unwelcome<br/>
At the feasting of Pohyola,<br/>
At the banquet of her people.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap28"/>RUNE XXVIII.<br/>
THE MOTHER’S COUNSEL.</h2>
<p>Ahti, hero of the Islands,<br/>
Wild magician, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Also known as Kaukomieli,<br/>
Hastened from the great carousal,<br/>
From the banquet-halls of Louhi,<br/>
From the ever-darksome Northland,<br/>
From the dismal Sariola.<br/>
Stormful strode he from the mansion,<br/>
Hastened like the smoke of battle,<br/>
From the court-yard of Pohyola,<br/>
Left his crimes and misdemeanors<br/>
In the halls of ancient Louhi.<br/>
Then he looked in all directions,<br/>
Seeking for his tethered courser,<br/>
Anxious looked in field and stable,<br/>
But he did not find his racer;<br/>
Found a black thing in the fallow,<br/>
Proved to be a clump of willows.<br/>
Who will well advise the hero,<br/>
Who will give him wise directions,<br/>
Guide the wizard out of trouble,<br/>
Give his hero-locks protection,<br/>
Keep his magic head from danger<br/>
From the warriors of Northland?<br/>
Noise is beard within the village,<br/>
And a din from other homesteads,<br/>
From the battle-hosts of Louhi,<br/>
Streaming from the doors and window,<br/>
Of the homesteads of Pohyola.<br/>
Thereupon young Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome Islander and hero,<br/>
Changing both his form and features,<br/>
Clad himself in other raiment,<br/>
Changing to another body,<br/>
Quick became a mighty eagle,<br/>
Soared aloft on wings of magic,<br/>
Tried to fly to highest heaven,<br/>
But the moonlight burned his temples,<br/>
And the sunshine singed his feathers.<br/>
Then entreating, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Island-hero, turned to Ukko,<br/>
This the prayer that Ahti uttered:<br/>
“Ukko, God of love and mercy,<br/>
Thou the Wisdom of the heavens,<br/>
Wise Director of the lightning,<br/>
Thou the Author of the thunder,<br/>
Thou the Guide of all the cloudlets,<br/>
Give to me thy cloak of vapor,<br/>
Throw a silver cloud around me,<br/>
That I may in its protection<br/>
Hasten to my native country,<br/>
To my mother’s Island-dwelling,<br/>
Fly to her that waits my coming,<br/>
With a mother’s grave forebodings.”<br/>
Farther, farther, Lemminkainen<br/>
Flew and soared on eagle-pinions,<br/>
Looked about him, backwards, forwards,<br/>
Spied a gray-hawk soaring near him,<br/>
In his eyes the fire of splendor,<br/>
Like the eyes of Pohyalanders,<br/>
Like the eyes of Pohya’s spearmen,<br/>
And the gray-hawk thus addressed him:<br/>
“Ho! There! hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Art thou thinking of our combat<br/>
With the hero-heads of Northland?”<br/>
Thus the Islander made answer,<br/>
These the words of Kaukomieli:<br/>
“O thou gray-hawk, bird of beauty,<br/>
Fly direct to Sariola,<br/>
Fly as fast as wings can bear thee;<br/>
When thou hast arrived in safety,<br/>
On the plains of darksome Northland,<br/>
Tell the archers and the spearmen,<br/>
They will never catch the eagle,<br/>
In his journey from Pohyola,<br/>
To his Island-borne and fortress.”<br/>
Then the Ahti-eagle hastened<br/>
Straightway to his mother’s cottage,<br/>
In his face the look of trouble,<br/>
In his heart the pangs of sorrow.<br/>
Ahti’s mother ran to meet him,<br/>
When she spied him in the pathway,<br/>
Walking toward her island-dwelling;<br/>
These the words the mother uttered:<br/>
“Of my sons thou art the bravest,<br/>
Art the strongest of my children;<br/>
Wherefore then comes thine annoyance,<br/>
On returning from Pohyola?<br/>
Wert thou worsted at the banquet,<br/>
At the feast and great carousal?<br/>
At thy cups, if thou wert injured,<br/>
Thou shalt here have better treatment<br/>
Thou shalt have the cup thy father<br/>
Brought me from the hero-castle.”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Worthy mother, thou that nursed me,<br/>
If I had been maimed at drinking,<br/>
I the landlord would have worsted,<br/>
Would have slain a thousand heroes,<br/>
Would have taught them useful lessons.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“Wherefore then art thou indignant,<br/>
Didst thou meet disgrace and insult,<br/>
Did they rob thee of thy courser?<br/>
Buy thou then a better courser<br/>
With the riches of thy mother,<br/>
With thy father’s horded treasures.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Faithful mother of my being,<br/>
If my steed had been insulted,<br/>
If for him my heart was injured,<br/>
I the landlord would have punished,<br/>
Would have punished all the horsemen,<br/>
All of Pohya’s strongest riders.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“Tell me then thy dire misfortune,<br/>
What has happened to my hero,<br/>
On his journey to Pohyola?<br/>
Have the Northland maidens scorned thee,<br/>
Have the women ridiculed thee?<br/>
If the maidens scorned thy presence.<br/>
If the women gave derision,<br/>
There are others thou canst laugh at,<br/>
Thou canst scorn a thousand women.”<br/>
Said the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Honored mother, fond and faithful,<br/>
If the Northland dames had scorned me<br/>
Or the maidens laughed derision,<br/>
I the maidens would have punished,<br/>
Would have scorned a thousand women.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“Wherefore then are thou indignant,<br/>
Thus annoyed, and heavy-hearted,<br/>
On returning from Pohyola?<br/>
Was thy feasting out of season,<br/>
Was the banquet-beer unworthy,<br/>
Were thy dreams of evil import<br/>
When asleep in darksome Northland?”<br/>
This is Lemminkainen’s answer:<br/>
“Aged women may remember<br/>
What they dream on beds of trouble;<br/>
I have seen some wondrous visions,<br/>
Since I left my Island-cottage.<br/>
My beloved, helpful mother,<br/>
Fill my bag with good provisions,<br/>
Flour and salt in great abundance,<br/>
Farther must thy hero wander,<br/>
He must leave his home behind him,<br/>
Leave his pleasant Island-dwelling,<br/>
Journey from this home of ages;<br/>
Men are sharpening their broadswords,<br/>
Sharpening their spears and lances,<br/>
For the death of Lemminkainen.”<br/>
Then again the mother questioned,<br/>
Hurriedly she asked the reason:<br/>
“Why the men their swords were whetting,<br/>
Why their spears are being sharpened.”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Therefore do they whet their broadswords,<br/>
Therefore sharpen they their lances:<br/>
It is for thy son’s destruction,<br/>
At his heart are aimed their lances.<br/>
In the court-yard of Pohyola,<br/>
There arose a great contention,<br/>
Fierce the battle waged against me;<br/>
But I slew the Northland hero,<br/>
Killed the host of Sariola;<br/>
Quick to arms rose Louhi’s people,<br/>
All the spears and swords of Northland<br/>
Were directed at thy hero;<br/>
All of Pohya turned against me,<br/>
Turned against a single foeman.”<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“I had told thee this beforehand,<br/>
I had warned thee of this danger,<br/>
And forbidden thee to journey<br/>
To the hostile fields of Northland.<br/>
Here my hero could have lingered,<br/>
Passed his life in full contentment,<br/>
Lived forever with his mother,<br/>
With his mother for protection,<br/>
In the court-yard with his kindred;<br/>
Here no war would have arisen,<br/>
No contention would have followed.<br/>
Whither wilt thou go, my hero,<br/>
Whither will my loved one hasten,<br/>
To escape thy fierce pursuers,<br/>
To escape from thy misdoings,<br/>
From thy sins to bide in safety,<br/>
From thy crimes and misdemeanors,<br/>
That thy head be not endangered,<br/>
That thy body be not mangled,<br/>
That thy locks be not outrooted?”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Know I not a spot befitting,<br/>
Do not know a place of safety,<br/>
Where to hide from my pursuers,<br/>
That will give me sure protection<br/>
From the crimes by me committed.<br/>
Helpful mother of my being,<br/>
Where to flee wilt thou advise me?”<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“I do not know where I can send thee;<br/>
Be a pine-tree on the mountain,<br/>
Or a juniper in lowlands?<br/>
Then misfortune may befall thee;<br/>
Often is the mountain pine-tree<br/>
Cut in splints for candle-lighters;<br/>
And the juniper is often<br/>
Peeled for fence-posts for the pastures.<br/>
Go a birch-tree to the valleys,<br/>
Or an elm-tree to the glenwood?<br/>
Even then may trouble find thee,<br/>
Misery may overtake thee;<br/>
Often is the lowland birch-tree<br/>
Cut to pieces in the ware-house;<br/>
Often is the elm-wood forest<br/>
Cleared away for other plantings.<br/>
Be a berry on the highlands,<br/>
Cranberry upon the heather,<br/>
Strawberry upon the mountains,<br/>
Blackberry along the fences?<br/>
Even there will trouble find thee,<br/>
There misfortune overtake thee,<br/>
For the berry-maids would pluck thee,<br/>
Silver-tinselled girls would get thee.<br/>
Be a pike then in the ocean,<br/>
Or a troutlet in the rivers?<br/>
Then would trouble overtake thee,<br/>
Would become thy life-companion;<br/>
Then the fisherman would catch thee,<br/>
Catch thee in his net of flax-thread,<br/>
Catch thee with his cruel fish-hook.<br/>
Be a wolf then in the forest,<br/>
Or a black-bear in the thickets?<br/>
Even then would trouble find thee,<br/>
And disaster cross thy pathway;<br/>
Sable hunters of the Northland<br/>
Have their spears and cross-bows ready<br/>
To destroy the wolf and black-bear.”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Know I well the worst of places,<br/>
Know where Death will surely follow,<br/>
Where misfortune’s eye would find me;<br/>
Since thou gavest me existence,<br/>
Gavest nourishment in childhood,<br/>
Whither shall I flee for safety,<br/>
Whither hide from death and danger?<br/>
In my view is fell destruction,<br/>
Dire misfortune hovers o’er me;<br/>
On the morrow come the spearmen,<br/>
Countless warriors from Pohya,<br/>
Ahti’s head their satisfaction.”<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“I can name a goodly refuge,<br/>
Name a land of small dimensions,<br/>
Name a distant ocean-island,<br/>
Where my son may live in safety.<br/>
Thither archers never wander,<br/>
There thy head cannot be severed;<br/>
But an oath as strong as heaven,<br/>
Thou must swear before thy mother;<br/>
Thou wilt not for sixty summers<br/>
Join in war or deadly combat,<br/>
Even though thou wishest silver,<br/>
Wishest gold and silver treasures.”<br/>
Spake the grateful Lemminkainen:<br/>
“I will swear an oath of honor,<br/>
That I’ll not in sixty summers<br/>
Draw my sword in the arena,<br/>
Test the warrior in battle;<br/>
I have wounds upon my shoulders,<br/>
On my breast two scars of broadsword,<br/>
Of my former battles, relies,<br/>
Relies of my last encounters,<br/>
On the battle-fields of Northland,<br/>
In the wars with men and heroes.”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“Go thou, take thy father’s vessel,<br/>
Go and bide thyself in safety,<br/>
Travel far across nine oceans;<br/>
In the tenth, sail to the centre,<br/>
To the island, forest-covered,<br/>
To the cliffs above the waters,<br/>
Where thy father went before thee,<br/>
Where he hid from his pursuers,<br/>
In the times of summer conquests,<br/>
In the darksome days of battle;<br/>
Good the isle for thee to dwell in,<br/>
Goodly place to live and linger;<br/>
Hide one year, and then a second,<br/>
In the third return in safety<br/>
To thy mother’s island dwelling,<br/>
To thy father’s ancient mansion,<br/>
To my hero’s place of resting.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap29"/>RUNE XXIX.<br/>
THE ISLE OF REFUGE.</h2>
<p>Lemminkainen, full of joyance,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Took provisions in abundance,<br/>
Fish and butter, bread and bacon,<br/>
Hastened to the Isle of Refuge,<br/>
Sailed away across the oceans,<br/>
Spake these measures on departing:<br/>
“Fare thee well, mine Island-dwelling,<br/>
I must sail to other borders,<br/>
To an island more protective,<br/>
Till the second summer passes;<br/>
Let the serpents keep the island,<br/>
Lynxes rest within the glen-wood,<br/>
Let the blue-moose roam the mountains,<br/>
Let the wild-geese cat the barley.<br/>
Fare thee well, my helpful mother!<br/>
When the warriors of the Northland,<br/>
From the dismal Sariola,<br/>
Come with swords, and spears, and cross-bows,<br/>
Asking for my head in vengeance,<br/>
Say that I have long departed,<br/>
Left my mother’s Island-dwelling,<br/>
When the barley had been garnered.”<br/>
Then he launched his boat of copper,<br/>
Threw the vessel to the waters,<br/>
From the iron-banded rollers,<br/>
From the cylinders of oak-wood,<br/>
On the masts the sails he hoisted,<br/>
Spread the magic sails of linen,<br/>
In the stern the hero settled<br/>
And prepared to sail his vessel,<br/>
One hand resting on the rudder.<br/>
Then the sailor spake as follows,<br/>
These the words of Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Blow, ye winds, and drive me onward,<br/>
Blow ye steady, winds of heaven,<br/>
Toward the island in the ocean,<br/>
That my bark may fly in safety<br/>
To my father’s place of refuge,<br/>
To the far and nameless island!”<br/>
Soon the winds arose as bidden,<br/>
Rocked the vessel o’er the billows,<br/>
O’er the blue-back of the waters,<br/>
O’er the vast expanse of ocean;<br/>
Blew two months and blew unceasing,<br/>
Blew a third month toward the island,<br/>
Toward his father’s Isle of Refuge.<br/>
Sat some maidens on the seaside,<br/>
On the sandy beach of ocean,<br/>
Turned about in all directions,<br/>
Looking out upon the billows;<br/>
One was waiting for her brother,<br/>
And a second for her father,<br/>
And a third one, anxious, waited<br/>
For the coming of her suitor;<br/>
There they spied young Lemminkainen,<br/>
There perceived the hero’s vessel<br/>
Sailing o’er the bounding billows;<br/>
It was like a hanging cloudlet,<br/>
Hanging twixt the earth and heaven.<br/>
Thus the island-maidens wondered,<br/>
Thus they spake to one another:<br/>
“What this stranger on the ocean,<br/>
What is this upon the waters?<br/>
Art thou one of our sea-vessels?<br/>
Wert thou builded on this island?<br/>
Sail thou straightway to the harbor,<br/>
To the island-point of landing<br/>
That thy tribe may be discovered.”<br/>
Onward did the waves propel it,<br/>
Rocked his vessel o’er the billows,<br/>
Drove it to the magic island,<br/>
Safely landed Lemminkainen<br/>
On the sandy shore and harbor.<br/>
Spake he thus when he had landed,<br/>
These the words that Ahti uttered:<br/>
“Is there room upon this island,<br/>
Is there space within this harbor,<br/>
Where my bark may lie at anchor,<br/>
Where the sun may dry my vessel?”<br/>
This the answer of the virgins,<br/>
Dwellers on the Isle of Refuge:<br/>
“There is room within this harbor,<br/>
On this island, space abundant,<br/>
Where thy bark may lie at anchor,<br/>
Where the sun may dry thy vessel;<br/>
Lying ready are the rollers,<br/>
Cylinders adorned with copper;<br/>
If thou hadst a hundred vessels,<br/>
Shouldst thou come with boats a thousand,<br/>
We would give them room in welcome.”<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Rolled his vessel in the harbor,<br/>
On the cylinders of copper,<br/>
Spake these words when he had ended:<br/>
“Is there room upon this island,<br/>
Or a spot within these forests,<br/>
Where a hero may be hidden<br/>
From the coming din of battle,<br/>
From the play of spears and arrows?<br/>
Thus replied the Island-maidens:<br/>
“There are places on this island,<br/>
On these plains a spot befitting<br/>
Where to hide thyself in safety,<br/>
Hero-son of little valor.<br/>
Here are many, many castles,<br/>
Many courts upon this island;<br/>
Though there come a thousand heroes,<br/>
Though a thousand spearmen follow,<br/>
Thou canst hide thyself in safety.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Is there room upon this island,<br/>
Where the birch-tree grows abundant,<br/>
Where this son may fell the forest,<br/>
And may cultivate the fallow?”<br/>
Answered thus the Island-maidens:<br/>
“There is not a spot befitting,<br/>
Not a place upon the island,<br/>
Where to rest thy wearied members,<br/>
Not the smallest patch of birch-wood,<br/>
Thou canst bring to cultivation.<br/>
All our fields have been divided,<br/>
All these woods have been apportioned,<br/>
Fields and forests have their owners.”<br/>
Lemminkainen asked this question,<br/>
These the words of Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Is there room upon this island,<br/>
Worthy spot in field or forest,<br/>
Where to Sing my songs of magic,<br/>
Chant my gathered store of wisdom,<br/>
Sing mine ancient songs and legends?”<br/>
Answered thus the Island-maidens:<br/>
“There is room upon this island,<br/>
Worthy place in these dominions,<br/>
Thou canst sing thy garnered wisdom,<br/>
Thou canst chant thine ancient legends,<br/>
Legends of the times primeval,<br/>
In the forest, in the castle,<br/>
On the island-plains and pastures.”<br/>
Then began the reckless minstrel<br/>
To intone his wizard-sayings;<br/>
Sang he alders to the waysides,<br/>
Sang the oaks upon the mountains,<br/>
On the oak-trees sang be branches,<br/>
On each branch he sang an acorn,<br/>
On the acorns, golden rollers,<br/>
On each roller, sang a cuckoo;<br/>
Then began the cuckoos, calling,<br/>
Gold from every throat came streaming,<br/>
Copper fell from every feather,<br/>
And each wing emitted silver,<br/>
Filled the isle with precious metals.<br/>
Sang again young Lemminkainen,<br/>
Conjured on, and sang, and chanted,<br/>
Sang to precious stones the sea-sands,<br/>
Sang the stones to pearls resplendent,<br/>
Robed the groves in iridescence,<br/>
Sang the island full of flowers,<br/>
Many-colored as the rainbow.<br/>
Sang again the magic minstrel,<br/>
In the court a well he conjured,<br/>
On the well a golden cover,<br/>
On the lid a silver dipper,<br/>
That the boys might drink the water,<br/>
That the maids might lave their eyelids.<br/>
On the plains he conjured lakelets,<br/>
Sang the duck upon the waters,<br/>
Golden-cheeked and silver-headed,<br/>
Sang the feet from shining copper;<br/>
And the Island-maidens wondered,<br/>
Stood entranced at Ahti’s wisdom,<br/>
At the songs of Lemminkainen,<br/>
At the hero’s magic power.<br/>
Spake the singer, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:<br/>
“I would sing a wondrous legend,<br/>
Sing in miracles of sweetness,<br/>
If within some hall or chamber,<br/>
I were seated at the table.<br/>
If I sing not in the castle,<br/>
In some spot by walls surrounded<br/>
Then I sing my songs to zephyrs,<br/>
Fling them to the fields and forests.”<br/>
Answered thus the Island-maidens:<br/>
“On this isle are castle-chambers,<br/>
Halls for use of magic singers,<br/>
Courts complete for chanting legends,<br/>
Where thy singing will be welcome,<br/>
Where thy songs will not be scattered<br/>
To the forests of the island,<br/>
Nor thy wisdom lost in ether.”<br/>
Straightway Lemminkainen journeyed<br/>
With the maidens to the castle;<br/>
There he sang and conjured pitchers<br/>
On the borders of the tables,<br/>
Sang and conjured golden goblets<br/>
Foaming with the beer of barley;<br/>
Sang he many well-filled vessels,<br/>
Bowls of honey-drink abundant,<br/>
Sweetest butter, toothsome biscuit,<br/>
Bacon, fish, and veal, and venison,<br/>
All the dainties of the Northland,<br/>
Wherewithal to still his hunger.<br/>
But the proud-heart, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Was not ready for the banquet,<br/>
Did not yet begin his feasting,<br/>
Waited for a knife of silver,<br/>
For a knife of golden handle;<br/>
Quick he sang the precious metals,<br/>
Sang a blade from purest silver,<br/>
To the blade a golden handle,<br/>
Straightway then began his feasting,<br/>
Quenched his thirst and stilled his hunger,<br/>
Charmed the maidens on the island.<br/>
Then the minstrel, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Roamed throughout the island-hamlets,<br/>
To the joy of all the virgins,<br/>
All the maids of braided tresses;<br/>
Wheresoe’er he turned his footsteps,<br/>
There appeared a maid to greet him;<br/>
When his hand was kindly offered,<br/>
There his band was kindly taken;<br/>
When he wandered out at evening,<br/>
Even in the darksome places,<br/>
There the maidens bade him welcome;<br/>
There was not an island-village<br/>
Where there were not seven castles,<br/>
In each castle seven daughters,<br/>
And the daughters stood in waiting,<br/>
Gave the hero joyful greetings,<br/>
Only one of all the maidens<br/>
Whom he did not greet with pleasure.<br/>
Thus the merry Lemminkainen<br/>
Spent three summers in the ocean,<br/>
Spent a merry time in refuge,<br/>
In the hamlets on the island,<br/>
To the pleasure of the maidens,<br/>
To the joy of all the daughters;<br/>
Only one was left neglected,<br/>
She a poor and graceless spinster,<br/>
On the isle’s remotest border,<br/>
In the smallest of the hamlets.<br/>
‘Then he thought about his journey<br/>
O’er the ocean to his mother,<br/>
To the cottage of his father.<br/>
There appeared the slighted spinster,<br/>
To the Northland son departing,<br/>
Spake these words to Lemminkainen:<br/>
“O, thou handsome Kaukomieli,<br/>
Wisdom-bard, and magic singer,<br/>
Since this maiden thou hast slighted,<br/>
May the winds destroy thy vessel,<br/>
Dash thy bark to countless fragments<br/>
On the ocean-rocks and ledges!”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s thoughts were homeward,<br/>
Did not heed the maiden’s murmurs,<br/>
Did not rise before the dawning<br/>
Of the morning on the island,<br/>
To the pleasure of the maiden<br/>
Of the much-neglected hamlet.<br/>
Finally at close of evening,<br/>
He resolved to leave the island,<br/>
He resolved to waken early,<br/>
Long before the dawn of morning;<br/>
Long before the time appointed,<br/>
He arose that he might wander<br/>
Through the hamlets of the island,<br/>
Bid adieu to all the maidens,<br/>
On the morn of his departure.<br/>
As he wandered hither, thither,<br/>
Walking through the village path-ways<br/>
To the last of all the hamlets;<br/>
Saw he none of all the castles,<br/>
Where three dwellings were not standing;<br/>
Saw he none of all the dwellings<br/>
Where three heroes were not watching;<br/>
Saw he none of all the heroes,<br/>
Who was not engaged in grinding<br/>
Swords, and spears, and battle-axes,<br/>
For the death of Lemminkainen.<br/>
And these words the hero uttered:<br/>
“Now alas! the Sun arises<br/>
From his couch within the ocean,<br/>
On the frailest of the heroes,<br/>
On the saddest child of Northland;<br/>
On my neck the cloak of Lempo<br/>
Might protect me from all evil,<br/>
Though a hundred foes assail me,<br/>
Though a thousand archers follow.”<br/>
Then he left the maids ungreeted,<br/>
Left his longing for the daughters<br/>
Of the nameless Isle of Refuge,<br/>
With his farewell-words unspoken,<br/>
Hastened toward the island-harbor,<br/>
Toward his magic bark at anchor;<br/>
But he found it burned to ashes,<br/>
Sweet revenge had fired his vessel,<br/>
Lighted by the slighted spinster.<br/>
Then he saw the dawn of evil,<br/>
Saw misfortune hanging over,<br/>
Saw destruction round about him.<br/>
Straightway he began rebuilding<br/>
Him a magic sailing-vessel,<br/>
New and wondrous, full of beauty;<br/>
But the hero needed timber,<br/>
Boards, and planks, and beams, and braces,<br/>
Found the smallest bit of lumber,<br/>
Found of boards but seven fragments,<br/>
Of a spool he found three pieces,<br/>
Found six pieces of the distaff;<br/>
With these fragments builds his vessel,<br/>
Builds a ship of magic virtue,<br/>
Builds the bark with secret knowledge,<br/>
Through the will of the magician;<br/>
Strikes one blow, and builds the first part,<br/>
Strikes a second, builds the centre,<br/>
Strikes a third with wondrous power,<br/>
And the vessel is completed.<br/>
Thereupon the ship he launches,<br/>
Sings the vessel to the ocean,<br/>
And these words the hero utters:<br/>
“Like a bubble swim these waters,<br/>
Like a flower ride the billows;<br/>
Loan me of thy magic feathers,<br/>
Three, O eagle, four, O raven,<br/>
For protection to my vessel,<br/>
Lest it flounder in the ocean!”<br/>
Now the sailor, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Seats himself upon the bottom<br/>
Of the vessel he has builded,<br/>
Hastens on his journey homeward,<br/>
Head depressed and evil-humored,<br/>
Cap awry upon his forehead,<br/>
Mind dejected, heavy-hearted,<br/>
That he could not dwell forever<br/>
In the castles of the daughters<br/>
Of the nameless Isle of Refuge.<br/>
Spake the minstrel, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli:<br/>
“Leave I must this merry island,<br/>
Leave her many joys and pleasures,<br/>
Leave her maids with braided tresses,<br/>
Leave her dances and her daughters,<br/>
To the joys of other heroes;<br/>
But I take this comfort with me:<br/>
All the maidens on the island,<br/>
Save the spinster who was slighted,<br/>
Will bemoan my loss for ages,<br/>
Will regret my quick departure;<br/>
They will miss me at the dances,<br/>
In the halls of mirth and joyance,<br/>
In the homes of merry maidens,<br/>
On my father’s Isle of Refuge.”<br/>
Wept the maidens on the island,<br/>
Long lamenting, loudly calling<br/>
To the hero sailing homeward:<br/>
“Whither goest, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Why depart, thou best of heroes?<br/>
Dost thou leave from inattention,<br/>
Is there here a dearth of maidens,<br/>
Have our greetings been unworthy?”<br/>
Sang the magic Lemminkainen<br/>
To the maids as he was sailing,<br/>
This in answer to their calling:<br/>
“Leaving not for want of pleasure,<br/>
Do not go from dearth of women<br/>
Beautiful the island-maidens,<br/>
Countless as the sands their virtues.<br/>
This the reason of my going,<br/>
I am longing for my home-land,<br/>
Longing for my mother’s cabins,<br/>
For the strawberries of Northland,<br/>
For the raspberries of Kalew,<br/>
For the maidens of my childhood,<br/>
For the children of my mother.”<br/>
Then the merry Lemminkainen<br/>
Bade farewell to all the island;<br/>
Winds arose and drove his vessel<br/>
On the blue-back of the ocean,<br/>
O’er the far-extending waters,<br/>
Toward the island of his mother.<br/>
On the shore were grouped the daughters<br/>
Of the magic Isle of Refuge,<br/>
On the rocks sat the forsaken,<br/>
Weeping stood the island-maidens,<br/>
Golden daughters, loud-lamenting.<br/>
Weep the maidens of the island<br/>
While the sail-yards greet their vision,<br/>
While the copper-beltings glisten;<br/>
Do not weep to lose the sail-yards,<br/>
Nor to lose the copper-beltings;<br/>
Weep they for the loss of Ahti,<br/>
For the fleeing Kaukomieli<br/>
Guiding the departing vessel.<br/>
Also weeps young Lemminkainen,<br/>
Sorely weeps, and loud-lamenting,<br/>
Weeps while he can see the island,<br/>
While the island hill-tops glisten;<br/>
Does not mourn the island-mountains,<br/>
Weeps he only for the maidens,<br/>
Left upon the Isle of Refuge.<br/>
Thereupon sailed Kaukomieli<br/>
On the blue-back of the ocean;<br/>
Sailed one day, and then a second,<br/>
But, alas! upon the third day,<br/>
There arose a mighty storm-wind,<br/>
And the sky was black with fury.<br/>
Blew the black winds from the north-west,<br/>
From the south-east came the whirlwind,<br/>
Tore away the ship’s forecastle,<br/>
Tore away the vessel’s rudder,<br/>
Dashed the wooden hull to pieces.<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Headlong fell upon the waters;<br/>
With his head he did the steering,<br/>
With his hands and feet, the rowing;<br/>
Swam whole days and nights unceasing,<br/>
Swam with hope and strength united,<br/>
Till at last appeared a cloudlet,<br/>
Growing cloudlet to the westward,<br/>
Changing to a promontory,<br/>
Into land within the ocean.<br/>
Swiftly to the shore swam Ahti,<br/>
Hastened to a magic castle,<br/>
Found therein a hostess baking,<br/>
And her daughters kneading barley,<br/>
And these words the hero uttered:<br/>
“O, thou hostess, filled with kindness,<br/>
Couldst thou know my pangs of hunger,<br/>
Couldst thou guess my name and station,<br/>
Thou wouldst hasten to the storehouse,<br/>
Bring me beer and foaming liquor,<br/>
Bring the best of thy provisions,<br/>
Bring me fish, and veal, and bacon,<br/>
Butter, bread, and honeyed biscuits,<br/>
Set for me a wholesome dinner,<br/>
Wherewithal to still my hunger,<br/>
Quench the thirst of Lemminkainen.<br/>
Days and nights have I been swimming,<br/>
Buffeting the waves of ocean,<br/>
Seemed as if the wind protected,<br/>
And the billows gave me shelter,”<br/>
Then the hostess, filled with kindness,<br/>
Hastened to the mountain storehouse,<br/>
Cut some butter, veal, and bacon,<br/>
Bread, and fish, and honeyed biscuit,<br/>
Brought the best of her provisions,<br/>
Brought the mead and beer of barley,<br/>
Set for him a toothsome dinner,<br/>
Wherewithal to still his hunger,<br/>
Quench the thirst of Lemminkainen.<br/>
When the hero’s feast had ended,<br/>
Straightway was a magic vessel<br/>
Given by the kindly hostess<br/>
To the weary Kaukomieli,<br/>
Bark of beauty, new and hardy,<br/>
Wherewithal to aid the stranger<br/>
In his journey to his home-land,<br/>
To the cottage of his mother.<br/>
Quickly sailed wild Lemminkainen<br/>
On the blue-back of the ocean;<br/>
Sailed he days and nights unceasing,<br/>
Till at last he reached the borders<br/>
Of his own loved home and country;<br/>
There beheld he scenes familiar,<br/>
Saw the islands, capes, and rivers,<br/>
Saw his former shipping-stations,<br/>
Saw he many ancient landmarks,<br/>
Saw the mountains with their fir-trees,<br/>
Saw the pine-trees on the hill-tops,<br/>
Saw the willows in the lowlands;<br/>
Did not see his father’s cottage,<br/>
Nor the dwellings of his mother.<br/>
Where a mansion once had risen,<br/>
There the alder-trees were growing,<br/>
Shrubs were growing on the homestead,<br/>
Junipers within the court-yard.<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“In this glen I played and wandered,<br/>
On these stones I rocked for ages,<br/>
On this lawn I rolled and tumbled,<br/>
Frolicked on these woodland-borders,<br/>
When a child of little stature.<br/>
Where then is my mother’s dwelling,<br/>
Where the castles of my father?<br/>
Fire, I fear, has found the hamlet,<br/>
And the winds dispersed the ashes.”<br/>
Then he fell to bitter weeping,<br/>
Wept one day and then a second,<br/>
Wept the third day without ceasing;<br/>
Did not mourn the ancient homestead,<br/>
Nor the dwellings of his father;<br/>
Wept he for his darling mother,<br/>
Wept he for the dear departed,<br/>
For the loved ones of the island.<br/>
Then he saw the bird of heaven,<br/>
Saw an eagle flying near him,<br/>
And he asked the bird this question:<br/>
“Mighty eagle, bird majestic,<br/>
Grant to me the information,<br/>
Where my mother may have wandered,<br/>
Whither I may go and find her!”<br/>
But the eagle knew but little,<br/>
Only knew that Ahti’s people<br/>
Long ago together perished;<br/>
And the raven also answered<br/>
That his people had been scattered<br/>
By the swords, and spears, and arrows,<br/>
Of his enemies from Pohya.<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Faithful mother, dear departed,<br/>
Thou who nursed me in my childhood,<br/>
Art thou dead and turned to ashes,<br/>
Didst thou perish for my follies,<br/>
O’er thy head are willows weeping,<br/>
Junipers above thy body,<br/>
Alders watching o’er thy slumbers?<br/>
This my punishment for evil,<br/>
This the recompense of folly!<br/>
Fool was I, a son unworthy,<br/>
That I measured swords in Northland<br/>
With the landlord of Pohyola,<br/>
To my tribe came fell destruction,<br/>
And the death of my dear mother,<br/>
Through my crimes and misdemeanors.”<br/>
Then the ministrel [sic] looked about him,<br/>
Anxious, looked in all directions,<br/>
And beheld some gentle foot-prints,<br/>
Saw a pathway lightly trodden<br/>
Where the heather had been beaten.<br/>
Quick as thought the path he followed,<br/>
Through the meadows, through the brambles,<br/>
O’er the hills, and through the valleys,<br/>
To a forest, vast and cheerless;<br/>
Travelled far and travelled farther,<br/>
Still a greater distance travelled,<br/>
To a dense and hidden glenwood,<br/>
In the middle of the island;<br/>
Found therein a sheltered cabin,<br/>
Found a small and darksome dwelling<br/>
Built between the rocky ledges,<br/>
In the midst of triple pine-trees;<br/>
And within he spied his mother,<br/>
Found his gray-haired mother weeping.<br/>
Lemminkainen loud rejoices,<br/>
Cries in tones of joyful greetings,<br/>
These the words that Ahti utters:<br/>
“Faithful mother, well-beloved,<br/>
Thou that gavest me existence,<br/>
Happy I, that thou art living,<br/>
That thou hast not yet departed<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
To the islands of the blessed,<br/>
I had thought that thou hadst perished,<br/>
Hadst been murdered by my foemen,<br/>
Hadst been slain with bows and arrows.<br/>
Heavy are mine eyes from weeping,<br/>
And my checks are white with sorrow,<br/>
Since I thought my mother slaughtered<br/>
For the sins I had committed!”<br/>
Lemminkainen’s mother answered:<br/>
“Long, indeed, hast thou been absent,<br/>
Long, my son, hast thou been living<br/>
In thy father’s Isle of Refuge,<br/>
Roaming on the secret island,<br/>
Living at the doors of strangers,<br/>
Living in a nameless country,<br/>
Refuge from the Northland foemen.”<br/>
Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Charming is that spot for living,<br/>
Beautiful the magic island,<br/>
Rainbow-colored was the forest,<br/>
Blue the glimmer of the meadows,<br/>
Silvered were, the pine-tree branches,<br/>
Golden were the heather-blossoms;<br/>
All the woodlands dripped with honey,<br/>
Eggs in every rock and crevice,<br/>
Honey flowed from birch and sorb-tree,<br/>
Milk in streams from fir and aspen,<br/>
Beer-foam dripping from the willows,<br/>
Charming there to live and linger,<br/>
All their edibles delicious.<br/>
This their only source of trouble:<br/>
Great the fear for all the maidens,<br/>
All the heroes filled with envy,<br/>
Feared the coming of the stranger;<br/>
Thought that all the island-maidens,<br/>
Thought that all the wives and daughters,<br/>
All the good, and all the evil,<br/>
Gave thy son too much attention;<br/>
Thought the stranger, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Saw the Island-maids too often;<br/>
Yet the virgins I avoided,<br/>
Shunned the good and shunned the evil,<br/>
Shunned the host of charming daughters,<br/>
As the black-wolf shuns the sheep-fold,<br/>
As the hawk neglects the chickens.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap30"/>RUNE XXX.<br/>
THE FROST-FIEND.</h2>
<p>Lemminkainen, reckless minstrel,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Hastens as the dawn is breaking,<br/>
At the dawning of the morning,<br/>
To the resting-place of vessels,<br/>
To the harbor of the island,<br/>
Finds the vessels sorely weeping,<br/>
Hears the wailing of the rigging,<br/>
And the ships intone this chorus:<br/>
“Must we wretched lie forever<br/>
In the harbor of this island,<br/>
Here to dry and fall in pieces?<br/>
Ahti wars no more in Northland,<br/>
Wars no more for sixty summers,<br/>
Even should he thirst for silver,<br/>
Should he wish the gold of battle.”<br/>
Lemminkainen struck his vessels<br/>
With his gloves adorned with copper,<br/>
And addressed the ships as follows:<br/>
“Mourn no more, my ships of fir-wood,<br/>
Strong and hardy is your rigging,<br/>
To the wars ye soon may hasten,<br/>
Hasten to the seas of battle;<br/>
Warriors may swarm your cabins<br/>
Ere to-morrow’s morn has risen.!’”<br/>
Then the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Hastened to his aged mother,<br/>
Spake to her the words that follow:<br/>
“Weep no longer, faithful mother,<br/>
Do not sorrow for thy hero,<br/>
Should he leave for scenes of battle,<br/>
For the hostile fields of Pohya;<br/>
Sweet revenge has fired my spirit,<br/>
And my soul is well determined,<br/>
To avenge the shameful insult<br/>
That the warriors of Northland<br/>
Gave to thee, defenseless woman.”<br/>
To restrain him seeks his mother,<br/>
Warns her son again of danger:<br/>
“Do not go, my son beloved,<br/>
To the wars in Sariola;<br/>
There the jaws of Death await thee,<br/>
Fell destruction lies before thee!”<br/>
Lemminkainen, little heeding,<br/>
Still determined, speaks as follows:<br/>
“Where may I secure a swordsman,<br/>
Worthy of my race of heroes,<br/>
To assist me in the combat?<br/>
Often I have heard of Tiera,<br/>
Heard of Kura of the islands,<br/>
This one I will take to help me,<br/>
Magic hero of the broadsword;<br/>
He will aid me in the combat,<br/>
Will protect me from destruction.”<br/>
Then he wandered to the islands,<br/>
On the way to Tiera’s hamlet,<br/>
These the words that Ahti utters<br/>
As he nears the ancient dwellings:<br/>
Dearest friend, my noble Tiera,<br/>
My beloved hero-brother,<br/>
Dost thou other times remember,<br/>
When we fought and bled together,<br/>
On the battle-fields of Northland?<br/>
There was not an island-village<br/>
Where there were not seven mansions,<br/>
In each mansion seven heroes,<br/>
And not one of all these foemen<br/>
Whom we did not slay with broadswords,<br/>
Victims of our skill and valor.”<br/>
Near the window sat the father<br/>
Whittling out a javelin-handle;<br/>
Near the threshold sat the mother<br/>
Skimming cream and making butter;<br/>
Near the portal stood the brother<br/>
Working on a sledge of birch-wood<br/>
Near the bridge-pass were the sisters<br/>
Washing out their varied garments.<br/>
Spake the father from the window,<br/>
From the threshold spake the mother,<br/>
From the portals spake the brother,<br/>
And the sisters from the bridge-pass:<br/>
“Tiera has no time for combat,<br/>
And his broadsword cannot battle;<br/>
Tiera is but late a bridegroom,<br/>
Still unveiled his bride awaits him.”<br/>
Near the hearth was Tiera lying,<br/>
Lying by the fire was Kura,<br/>
Hastily one foot was shoeing,<br/>
While the other lay in waiting.<br/>
From the hook he takes his girdle,<br/>
Buckles it around his body,<br/>
Takes a javelin from its resting,<br/>
Not the largest, nor the smallest,<br/>
Buckles on his mighty scabbard,<br/>
Dons his heavy mail of copper;<br/>
On each javelin pranced a charger,<br/>
Wolves were howling from his helmet,<br/>
On the rings the bears were growling.<br/>
Tiera poised his mighty javelin,<br/>
Launched the spear upon its errand;<br/>
Hurled the shaft across the pasture,<br/>
To the border of the forest,<br/>
O’er the clay-fields of Pohyola,<br/>
O’er the green and fragrant meadows,<br/>
Through the distant bills of Northland.<br/>
Then great Tiera touched his javelin<br/>
To the mighty spear of Ahti,<br/>
Pledged his aid to Lemminkainen,<br/>
As his combatant and comrade.<br/>
Thereupon wild Kaukomieli<br/>
Pushed his boat upon the waters;<br/>
Like the serpent through the heather,<br/>
Like the creeping of the adder,<br/>
Sails the boat away to Pohya,<br/>
O’er the seas of Sariola.<br/>
Quick the wicked hostess, Louhi,<br/>
Sends the black-frost of the heavens<br/>
To the waters of Pohyola,<br/>
O’er the far-extending sea-plains,<br/>
Gave the black-frost these directions:<br/>
“Much-loved Frost, my son and hero,<br/>
Whom thy mother has instructed,<br/>
Hasten whither I may send thee,<br/>
Go wherever I command thee,<br/>
Freeze the vessel of this hero,<br/>
Lemminkainen’s bark of magic,<br/>
On the broad back of the ocean,<br/>
On the far-extending waters;<br/>
Freeze the wizard in his vessel,<br/>
Freeze to ice the wicked Ahti,<br/>
That he never more may wander,<br/>
Never waken while thou livest,<br/>
Or at least till I shall free him,<br/>
Wake him from his icy slumber!”<br/>
Frost, the son of wicked parents,<br/>
Hero-son of evil manners,<br/>
Hastens off to freeze the ocean,<br/>
Goes to fasten down the flood-gates,<br/>
Goes to still the ocean-currents.<br/>
As he hastens on his journey,<br/>
Takes the leaves from all the forest,<br/>
Strips the meadows of their verdure,<br/>
Robs the flowers of their colors.<br/>
When his journey he had ended,<br/>
Gained the border of the ocean,<br/>
Gained the sea-shore curved and endless,<br/>
On the first night of his visit,<br/>
Freezes he the lakes and rivers,<br/>
Freezes too the shore of ocean,<br/>
Freezes not the ocean-billows,<br/>
Does not check the ocean-currents.<br/>
On the sea a finch is resting,<br/>
Bird of song upon the waters,<br/>
But his feet are not yet frozen,<br/>
Neither is his head endangered.<br/>
When the second night Frost lingered,<br/>
He began to grow important,<br/>
He became a fierce intruder,<br/>
Fearless grew in his invasions,<br/>
Freezes everything before him;<br/>
Sends the fiercest cold of Northland,<br/>
Turns to ice the boundless waters.<br/>
Ever thicker, thicker, thicker,<br/>
Grew the ice on sea and ocean,<br/>
Ever deeper, deeper, deeper,<br/>
Fell the snow on field and forest,<br/>
Froze the hero’s ship of beauty,<br/>
Cold and lifeless bark of Ahti;<br/>
Sought to freeze wild Lemminkainen,<br/>
Freeze him lifeless as his vessel,<br/>
Asked the minstrel for his life-blood,<br/>
For his ears, and feet, and fingers.<br/>
Then the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Angry grew and filled with magic,<br/>
Hurled the black-frost to the fire-god,<br/>
Threw him to the fiery furnace,<br/>
Held him in his forge of iron,<br/>
Then addressed the frost as follows:<br/>
“Frost, thou evil son of Northland,<br/>
Dire and only son of Winter,<br/>
Let my members not be stiffened,<br/>
Neither ears, nor feet, nor fingers,<br/>
Neither let my head be frozen.<br/>
Thou hast other things to feed on,<br/>
Many other beads to stiffen;<br/>
Leave in peace the flesh of heroes,<br/>
Let this minstrel pass in safety,<br/>
Freeze the swamps, and lakes, and rivers,<br/>
Fens and forests, bills and valleys;<br/>
Let the cold stones grow still colder,<br/>
Freeze the willows in the waters,<br/>
Let the aspens freeze and suffer,<br/>
Let the bark peel from the birch-trees,<br/>
Let the Pines burst on the mountains,<br/>
Let this hero pass in safety,<br/>
Do not let his locks be stiffened.<br/>
“If all these prove insufficient,<br/>
Feed on other worthy matters;<br/>
Let the hot stones freeze asunder,<br/>
Let the flaming rocks be frozen,<br/>
Freeze the fiery blocks of iron,<br/>
Freeze to ice the iron mountains;<br/>
Stiffen well the mighty Wuoksi,<br/>
Let Imatra freeze to silence;<br/>
Freeze the sacred stream and whirlpool,<br/>
Let their boiling billows stiffen,<br/>
Or thine origin I’ll sing thee,<br/>
Tell thy lineage of evil.<br/>
Well I know thine evil nature,<br/>
Know thine origin and power,<br/>
Whence thou camest, where thou goest,<br/>
Know thine ancestry of evil.<br/>
Thou wert born upon the aspen,<br/>
Wert conceived upon the willows,<br/>
Near the borders of Pohyola,<br/>
In the courts of dismal Northland;<br/>
Sin-begotten was thy father,<br/>
And thy mother was Dishonor.<br/>
“While in infancy who fed thee<br/>
While thy mother could not nurse thee?<br/>
Surely thou wert fed by adders,<br/>
Nursed by foul and slimy serpents;<br/>
North-winds rocked thee into slumber,<br/>
Cradled thee in roughest weather,<br/>
In the worst of willow-marshes,<br/>
In the springs forever flowing,<br/>
Evil-born and evil-nurtured,<br/>
Grew to be an evil genius,<br/>
Evil was thy mind and spirit,<br/>
And the infant still was nameless,<br/>
Till the name of Frost was given<br/>
To the progeny of evil.<br/>
“Then the young lad lived in hedges,<br/>
Dwelt among the weeds and willows,<br/>
Lived in springs in days of summer,<br/>
On the borders of the marshes,<br/>
Tore the lindens in the winter,<br/>
Stormed among the glens and forests,<br/>
Raged among the sacred birch-trees,<br/>
Rattled in the alder-branches,<br/>
Froze the trees, the shoots, the grasses,<br/>
Evened all the plains and prairies,<br/>
Ate the leaves within the woodlands,<br/>
Made the stalks drop down their blossoms,<br/>
Peeled the bark on weeds and willows.<br/>
“Thou hast grown to large proportions,<br/>
Hast become too tall and mighty;<br/>
Dost thou labor to benumb me,<br/>
Dost thou wish mine ears and fingers,<br/>
Of my feet wouldst thou deprive me?<br/>
Do not strive to freeze this hero,<br/>
In his anguish and misfortune;<br/>
In my stockings I shall kindle<br/>
Fire to drive thee from my presence,<br/>
In my shoes lay flaming faggots,<br/>
Coals of fire in every garment,<br/>
Heated sandstones in my rigging;<br/>
Thus will hold thee at a distance.<br/>
Then thine evil form I’ll banish<br/>
To the farthest Northland borders;<br/>
When thy journey is completed,<br/>
When thy home is reached in safety,<br/>
Freeze the caldrons in the castle,<br/>
Freeze the coal upon the hearthstone,<br/>
In the dough, the hands of women,<br/>
On its mother’s lap, the infant,<br/>
Freeze the colt beside its mother.<br/>
“If thou shouldst not heed this order,<br/>
I shall banish thee still farther,<br/>
To the carbon-piles of Hisi,<br/>
To the chimney-hearth of Lempo,<br/>
Hurl thee to his fiery furnace,<br/>
Lay thee on the iron anvil,<br/>
That thy body may be hammered<br/>
With the sledges of the blacksmith,<br/>
May be pounded into atoms,<br/>
Twixt the anvil and the hammer.<br/>
“If thou shouldst not heed this order,<br/>
Shouldst not leave me to my freedom,<br/>
Know I still another kingdom,<br/>
Know another spot of resting;<br/>
I shall drive thee to the summer,<br/>
Lead thy tongue to warmer climates,<br/>
There a prisoner to suffer,<br/>
Never to obtain thy freedom<br/>
Till thy spirit I deliver,<br/>
Till I go myself and free thee.”<br/>
Wicked Frost, the son of Winter,<br/>
Saw the magic bird of evil<br/>
Hovering above his spirit,<br/>
Straightway prayed for Ahti’s mercy,<br/>
These the words the Frost-fiend uttered:<br/>
“Let us now agree together,<br/>
Neither one to harm the other,<br/>
Never in the course of ages,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers<br/>
On the snow-capped hills of Northland.<br/>
If thou hearest that I bring thee<br/>
Cold to freeze thy feet and fingers,<br/>
Hurl me to the fiery furnace,<br/>
Hammer me upon the anvil<br/>
Of the blacksmith, Ilmarinen;<br/>
Lead my tongue to warmer climates,<br/>
Banish me to lands of summer,<br/>
There a prisoner to suffer,<br/>
Nevermore to gain my freedom.”<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Left his vessel in the ocean,<br/>
Frozen in the ice of Northland,<br/>
Left his warlike boat forever,<br/>
Started on his cheerless journey<br/>
To the borders of Pohyola,<br/>
And the mighty Tiera followed<br/>
In the tracks of his companion.<br/>
On the ice they journeyed northward<br/>
Briskly walked upon the ice-plain,<br/>
Walked one day, and then a second,<br/>
Till the closing of the third day,<br/>
When the Hunger-land approached them,<br/>
When appeared Starvation-island.<br/>
Here the hardy Lemminkainen<br/>
Hastened forward to the castle,<br/>
This the hero’s prayer and question;<br/>
“Is there food within this castle,<br/>
Fish or fowl within its larders,<br/>
To refresh us on our journey,<br/>
Mighty heroes, cold and weary?<br/>
When the hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Found no food within the castle,<br/>
Neither fish, nor fowl, nor bacon,<br/>
Thus he cursed it and departed:<br/>
“May the fire destroy these chambers,<br/>
May the waters flood this dwelling,<br/>
Wash it to the seas of Mana!”<br/>
Then they hastened onward, onward,<br/>
Hastened on through field and forest,<br/>
Over by-ways long untrodden,<br/>
Over unknown paths and snow-fields;<br/>
Here the hardy Lemminkainen,<br/>
Reckless hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Pulled the soft wool from the ledges,<br/>
Gathered lichens from the tree-trunks,<br/>
Wove them into magic stockings,<br/>
Wove them into shoes and mittens,<br/>
On the settles of the hoar-frost,<br/>
In the stinging cold of Northland.<br/>
Then he sought to find some pathway,<br/>
That would guide their wayward footsteps,<br/>
And the hero spake as follows:<br/>
“O thou Tiera, friend beloved,<br/>
Shall we reach our destination,<br/>
Wandering for days together,<br/>
Through these Northland fields and forests?<br/>
Kura thus replies to Ahti:<br/>
“We, alas! have come for vengeance,<br/>
Come for blood and retribution,<br/>
To the battle-fields of Northland,<br/>
To the dismal Sariola,<br/>
Here to leave our souls and bodies,<br/>
Here to starve, and freeze, and perish,<br/>
In the dreariest of places,<br/>
In this sun-forsaken country!<br/>
Never shall we gain the knowledge,<br/>
Never learn it, never tell it,<br/>
Which the pathway that can guide us<br/>
To the forest-beds to suffer,<br/>
To the Pohya-plains to perish,<br/>
In the home-land of the ravens,<br/>
Fitting food for crows and eagles.<br/>
Often do the Northland vultures<br/>
Hither come to feed their fledgelings;<br/>
Hither bring the birds of heaven<br/>
Bits of flesh and blood of heroes;<br/>
Often do the beaks of ravens<br/>
Tear the flesh of kindred corpses,<br/>
Often do the eagle’s talons<br/>
Carry bones and trembling vitals,<br/>
Such as ours, to feed their nestlings,<br/>
In their rocky homes and ledges.<br/>
“Oh! my mother can but wonder,<br/>
Never can divine the answer,<br/>
Where her reckless son is roaming,<br/>
Where her hero’s blood is flowing,<br/>
Whether in the swamps and lowlands<br/>
Whether in the heat of battle,<br/>
Or upon the waves of the ocean,<br/>
Or upon the hop-field mountains,<br/>
Or along some forest by-way.<br/>
Nothing can her mind discover<br/>
Of the frailest of her heroes,<br/>
Only think that he has perished.<br/>
Thus the hoary-headed mother<br/>
Weeps and murmurs in her chambers:<br/>
‘Where is now my son beloved,<br/>
In the kingdom of Manala?<br/>
Sow thy crops, thou dread Tuoni,<br/>
Harrow well the fields of Kalma!<br/>
Now the bow receives its respite<br/>
From the fingers of my Tiera;<br/>
Bow and arrow now are useless,<br/>
Now the merry birds can fatten<br/>
In the fields, and fens, and forests;<br/>
Bears may live in dens of freedom,<br/>
On the fields may sport the elk-herds.’”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Thus it is, mine aged mother,<br/>
Thou that gavest me existence!<br/>
Thou hast reared thy broods of chickens,<br/>
Hatched and reared thy flights of white-swans<br/>
All of them the winds have scattered,<br/>
Or the evil Lempo frightened;<br/>
One flew hither, and one thither,<br/>
And a third one, lost forever!<br/>
Think thou of our former pleasures,<br/>
Of our better days together,<br/>
When I wandered like the flowers,<br/>
Like the berry in the meadows.<br/>
Many saw my form majestic,<br/>
Many thought me well-proportioned.<br/>
Now is not as then with Ahti,<br/>
Into evil days have fallen,<br/>
Since I see but storms and darkness!<br/>
Then my eyes beheld but sunshine,<br/>
Then we did not weep and murmur,<br/>
Did not fill our hearts with sorrow,<br/>
When the maids in joy were singing,<br/>
When the virgins twined their tresses;<br/>
Then the women joined in joyance,<br/>
Whether brides were happy-wedded,<br/>
Whether bridegrooms choose discreetly,<br/>
Whether they were wise or unwise.<br/>
“But we must not grow disheartened,<br/>
Let the Island-maidens cheer us;<br/>
Here we are not yet enchanted,<br/>
Not bewitched by magic singing,<br/>
On the paths not left to perish,<br/>
Sink and perish on our journey.<br/>
Full of youth we should not suffer,<br/>
Strong, we should not die unworthy,<br/>
Whom the wizards have enchanted,<br/>
Have bewitched with songs of magic;<br/>
Sorcerers may charm and conquer,<br/>
Bury them within their dungeons,<br/>
Hide them spell-bound in their cabins.<br/>
Let the wizards charm each other,<br/>
And bewitch their magic offspring,<br/>
Bring their tribes to fell destruction.<br/>
Never did my gray-haired father<br/>
Bow submission to a wizard,<br/>
Offer worship to magicians.<br/>
These the words my father uttered,<br/>
These the thoughts his son advances:<br/>
‘Guard us, thou O great Creator,<br/>
Shield us, thou O God of mercy,<br/>
With thine arms of grace protect us,<br/>
Help us with thy strength and wisdom,<br/>
Guide the minds of all thy heroes,<br/>
Keep aright the thoughts of women,<br/>
Keep the old from speaking evil,<br/>
Keep the young from sin and folly,<br/>
Be to us a help forever,<br/>
Be our Guardian and our Father,<br/>
That our children may not wander<br/>
From the ways of their Creator,<br/>
From the path that God has given!’”<br/>
Then the hero Lemminkainen,<br/>
Made from cares the fleetest racers,<br/>
Sable racers from his sorrows,<br/>
Reins he made from days of evil,<br/>
From his sacred pains made saddles.<br/>
To the saddle, quickly springing,<br/>
Galloped he away from trouble,<br/>
To his dear and aged mother;<br/>
And his comrade, faithful Tiera,<br/>
Galloped to his Island-dwelling.<br/>
Now departs wild Lemminkainen,<br/>
Brave and reckless Kaukomieli,<br/>
From these ancient songs and legends;<br/>
Only guides his faithful Kura<br/>
To his waiting bride and kindred,<br/>
While these lays and incantations<br/>
Shall be turned to other heroes.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap31"/>RUNE XXXI.<br/>
KULLERWOINEN SON OF EVIL.</h2>
<p>In the ancient times a mother<br/>
Hatched and raised some swans and chickens,<br/>
Placed the chickens in the brushwood,<br/>
Placed her swans upon the river;<br/>
Came an eagle, hawk, and falcon,<br/>
Scattered all her swans and chickens,<br/>
One was carried to Karyala,<br/>
And a second into Ehstland,<br/>
Left a third at home in Pohya.<br/>
And the one to Ehstland taken<br/>
Soon became a thriving merchant;<br/>
He that journeyed to Karyala<br/>
Flourished and was called Kalervo;<br/>
He that hid away in Pohya<br/>
Took the name of Untamoinen,<br/>
Flourished to his father’s sorrow,<br/>
To the heart-pain of his mother.<br/>
Untamoinen sets his fish-nets<br/>
In the waters of Kalervo;<br/>
Kullerwoinen sees the fish-nets,<br/>
Takes the fish home in his basket.<br/>
Then Untamo, evil-minded,<br/>
Angry grew and sighed for vengeance,<br/>
Clutched his fingers for the combat,<br/>
Bared his mighty arms for battle,<br/>
For the stealing of his salmon,<br/>
For the robbing of his fish-nets.<br/>
Long they battled, fierce the struggle,<br/>
Neither one could prove the victor;<br/>
Should one beat the other fiercely,<br/>
He himself was fiercely beaten.<br/>
Then arose a second trouble;<br/>
On the second and the third days,<br/>
Kalerwoinen sowed some barley<br/>
Near the barns of Untamoinen;<br/>
Untamoinen’s sheep in hunger<br/>
Ate the crop of Kullerwoinen;<br/>
Kullerwoinen’s dog in malice<br/>
Tore Untamo’s sheep in pieces;<br/>
Then Untamo sorely threatened<br/>
To annihilate the people<br/>
Of his brother, Kalerwoinen,<br/>
To exterminate his tribe-folk,<br/>
To destroy the young and aged,<br/>
To out-root his race and kingdom;<br/>
Conjures men with broadswords girded,<br/>
For the war he fashions heroes,<br/>
Fashions youth with spears adjusted,<br/>
Bearing axes on their shoulders,<br/>
Conjures thus a mighty army,<br/>
Hastens to begin a battle,<br/>
Bring a war upon his brother.<br/>
Kalerwoinen’s wife in beauty<br/>
Sat beside her chamber-window,<br/>
Looking out along the highway,<br/>
Spake these words in wonder guessing:<br/>
“Do I see some smoke arising,<br/>
Or perchance a heavy storm-cloud,<br/>
Near the border of the forest,<br/>
Near the ending of the prairie?”<br/>
It was not some smoke arising,<br/>
Nor indeed a heavy storm-cloud,<br/>
It was Untamoinen’s soldiers<br/>
Marching to the place of battle.<br/>
Warriors of Untamoinen<br/>
Came equipped with spears and arrows,<br/>
Killed the people of Kalervo,<br/>
Slew his tribe and all his kindred,<br/>
Burned to ashes many dwellings,<br/>
Levelled many courts and cabins,<br/>
Only, left Kalervo’s daughter,<br/>
With her unborn child, survivors<br/>
Of the slaughter of Untamo;<br/>
And she led the hostile army<br/>
To her father’s halls and mansion,<br/>
Swept the rooms and made them cheery,<br/>
Gave the heroes home-attentions.<br/>
Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
Ere a boy was born in magic<br/>
Of the virgin, Untamala,<br/>
Of a mother, trouble-laden,<br/>
Him the mother named Kullervo,<br/>
“Pearl of Combat,” said Untamo.<br/>
Then they laid the child of wonder,<br/>
Fatherless, the magic infant,<br/>
In the cradle of attention,<br/>
To be rocked, and fed, and guarded;<br/>
But he rocked himself at pleasure,<br/>
Rocked until his locks stood endwise;<br/>
Rocked one day, and then a second,<br/>
Rocked the third from morn till noontide;<br/>
But before the third day ended,<br/>
Kicks the boy with might of magic,<br/>
Forwards, backwards, upwards, downwards,<br/>
Kicks in miracles of power,<br/>
Bursts with might his swaddling garments<br/>
Creeping from beneath his blankets,<br/>
Knocks his cradle into fragments,<br/>
Tears to tatters all his raiment,<br/>
Seemed that he would grow a hero,<br/>
And his mother, Untamala,<br/>
Thought that be, when full of stature,<br/>
When he found his strength and reason,<br/>
Would become a great magician,<br/>
First among a thousand heroes.<br/>
When three months the boy had thriven,<br/>
He began to speak as follows:<br/>
“When my form is full of stature,<br/>
When these arms grow strong and hardy,<br/>
Then will I avenge the murder<br/>
Of Kalervo and his people!”<br/>
Untamoinen bears the saying,<br/>
Speaks these words to those about him;<br/>
“To my tribe he brings destruction,<br/>
In him grows a new Kalervo!”<br/>
Then the heroes well considered,<br/>
And the women gave their counsel,<br/>
How to kill the magic infant,<br/>
That their tribe may live in safety.<br/>
It appeared the boy would prosper;<br/>
Finally, they all consenting,<br/>
He was placed within a basket,<br/>
And with willows firmly fastened,<br/>
Taken to the reeds and rushes,<br/>
Lowered to the deepest waters,<br/>
In his basket there to perish.<br/>
When three nights had circled over,<br/>
Messengers of Untamoinen<br/>
Went to see if he had perished<br/>
In his basket in the waters;<br/>
But the prodigy, was living,<br/>
Had not perished in the rushes;<br/>
He had left his willow-basket,<br/>
Sat in triumph on a billow,<br/>
In his hand a rod of copper,<br/>
On the rod a golden fish-line,<br/>
Fishing for the silver whiting,<br/>
Measuring the deeps beneath him;<br/>
In the sea was little water,<br/>
Scarcely would it fill three measures.<br/>
Untamoinen then reflected,<br/>
This the language of the wizard:<br/>
“Whither shall we take this wonder,<br/>
Lay this prodigy of evil,<br/>
That destruction may o’ertake him,<br/>
Where the boy will sink and perish?”<br/>
Then his messengers he ordered<br/>
To collect dried poles of brushwood,<br/>
Birch-trees with their hundred branches,<br/>
Pine-trees full of pitch and resin,<br/>
Ordered that a pyre be builded,<br/>
That the boy might be cremated,<br/>
That Kullervo thus might perish.<br/>
High they piled the arid branches,<br/>
Dried limbs from the sacred birch-tree,<br/>
Branches from a hundred fir-trees,<br/>
Knots and branches full of resign;<br/>
Filled with bark a thousand sledges,<br/>
Seasoned oak, a hundred measures;<br/>
Piled the brushwood to the tree-tops,<br/>
Set the boy upon the summit,<br/>
Set on fire the pile of brushwood,<br/>
Burned one day, and then a second,<br/>
Burned the third from morn till evening.<br/>
When Untamo sent his heralds<br/>
To inspect the pyre and wizard,<br/>
There to learn if young Kullervo<br/>
Had been burned to dust and ashes,<br/>
There they saw the young boy sitting<br/>
On a pyramid of embers,<br/>
In his band a rod of copper,<br/>
Raking coals of fire about him,<br/>
To increase their heat and power;<br/>
Not a hair was burned nor injured,<br/>
Not a ringlet singed nor shrivelled.<br/>
Then Untamo, evil-humored,<br/>
Thus addressed his trusted heralds:<br/>
“Whither shall the boy be taken,<br/>
To what place this thing of evil,<br/>
That destruction may o’ertake him.<br/>
That the boy may sink and perish?”<br/>
Then they hung him to an oak-tree,<br/>
Crucified him in the branches,<br/>
That the wizard there might perish.<br/>
When three days and nights had ended,<br/>
Untamoinen spake as follows:<br/>
“It is time to send my heralds<br/>
To inspect the mighty oak-tree,<br/>
There to learn if young Kullervo<br/>
Lives or dies among the branches.”<br/>
Thereupon he sent his servants,<br/>
And the heralds brought this message:<br/>
“Young Kullervo has not perished,<br/>
Has not died among the branches<br/>
Of the oak-tree where we hung him.<br/>
In the oak he maketh pictures<br/>
With a wand between his fingers;<br/>
Pictures hang from all the branches,<br/>
Carved and painted by Kullervo;<br/>
And the heroes, thick as acorns,<br/>
With their swords and spears adjusted,<br/>
Fill the branches of the oak-tree,<br/>
Every leaf becomes a soldier.”<br/>
Who can help the grave Untamo<br/>
Kill the boy that threatens evil<br/>
To Untamo’s tribe and country,<br/>
Since he will not die by water,<br/>
Nor by fire, nor crucifixion?<br/>
Finally it was decided<br/>
That his body was immortal,<br/>
Could not suffer death nor torture.<br/>
In despair grave Untamoinen<br/>
Thus addressed the boy, Kullervo:<br/>
“Wilt thou live a life becoming,<br/>
Always do my people honor,<br/>
Should I keep thee in my dwelling?<br/>
Shouldst thou render servant’s duty,<br/>
Then thou wilt receive thy wages,<br/>
Reaping whatsoe’er thou sowest;<br/>
Thou canst wear the golden girdle,<br/>
Or endure the tongue of censure.”<br/>
When the boy had grown a little,<br/>
Had increased in strength and stature,<br/>
He was given occupation,<br/>
He was made to tend an infant,<br/>
Made to rock the infant’s cradle.<br/>
These the words of Untamoinen:<br/>
“Often look upon the young child,<br/>
Feed him well and guard from danger,<br/>
Wash his linen in the river,<br/>
Give the infant good attention.”<br/>
Young Kullervo, wicked wizard,<br/>
Nurses one day then a second;<br/>
On the morning of the third day,<br/>
Gives the infant cruel treatment,<br/>
Blinds its eyes and breaks its fingers;<br/>
And when evening shadows gather,<br/>
Kills the young child while it slumbers,<br/>
Throws its body to the waters,<br/>
Breaks and burns the infant’s cradle.<br/>
Untamoinen thus reflected:<br/>
“Never will this fell Kullervo<br/>
Be a worthy nurse for children,<br/>
Cannot rock a babe in safety;<br/>
Do not know how I can use him,<br/>
What employment I can give him!”<br/>
Then he told the young magician<br/>
He must fell the standing forest,<br/>
And Kullervo gave this answer:<br/>
“Only will I be a hero,<br/>
When I wield the magic hatchet;<br/>
I am young, and fair, and mighty,<br/>
Far more beautiful than others,<br/>
Have the skill of six magicians.”<br/>
Thereupon he sought the blacksmith,<br/>
This the order of Kullervo:<br/>
“Listen, O thou metal-artist,<br/>
Forge for me an axe of copper,<br/>
Forge the mighty axe of heroes,<br/>
Wherewith I may fell the forest,<br/>
Fell the birch, and oak, and aspen.”<br/>
This behest the blacksmith honors,<br/>
Forges him an axe of copper,<br/>
Wonderful the blade he forges.<br/>
Kullerwoinen grinds his hatchet,<br/>
Grinds his blade from morn till evening,<br/>
And the next day makes the handle;<br/>
Then he hastens to the forest,<br/>
To the upward-sloping mountain,<br/>
To the tallest of the birches,<br/>
To the mightiest of oak-trees;<br/>
There he swings his axe of copper,<br/>
Swings his blade with might of magic,<br/>
Cuts with sharpened edge the aspen,<br/>
With one blow he fells the oak-tree,<br/>
With a second blow, the linden;<br/>
Many trees have quickly fallen,<br/>
By the hatchet of Kullervo.<br/>
Then the wizard spake as follows:<br/>
“This the proper work of Lempo,<br/>
Let dire Hisi fell the forest!”<br/>
In the birch he sank his hatchet,<br/>
Made an uproar in the woodlands,<br/>
Called aloud in tones, of thunder,<br/>
Whistled to the distant mountains,<br/>
Till they echoed to his calling,<br/>
When Kullervo spake as follows:<br/>
“May the forest, in the circle<br/>
Where my voice rings, fall and perish,<br/>
In the earth be lost forever!<br/>
May no tree remain unlevelled,<br/>
May no saplings grow in spring-time,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers,<br/>
Where Kullervo’s voice has echoed,<br/>
Where the forest hears my calling;<br/>
Where the ground with seed is planted,<br/>
And the grain shall sprout and flourish,<br/>
May it never come to ripeness,<br/>
Mar the ears of corn be blasted!”<br/>
When the strong man, Untamoinen,<br/>
Went to look at early evening,<br/>
How Kullervo was progressing,<br/>
In his labors in the forest;<br/>
Little was the work accomplished,<br/>
Was not worthy of a hero;<br/>
Untamoinen thus reflected:<br/>
“Young Kullervo is not fitted<br/>
For the work of clearing forests,<br/>
Wastes the best of all the timber,<br/>
To my lands he brings destruction;<br/>
I shall set him making fences.”<br/>
Then the youth began the building<br/>
Of a fence for Untamoinen;<br/>
Took the trunks of stately fir-trees,<br/>
Trimmed them with his blade for fence-posts,<br/>
Cut the tallest in the woodlands,<br/>
For the railing of his fences;<br/>
Made the smaller poles and cross-bars<br/>
From the longest of the lindens;<br/>
Made the fence without a pass-way,<br/>
Made no wicket in his fences,<br/>
And Kullervo spake these measures.<br/>
“He that does not rise as eagles,<br/>
Does not sail on wings through ether,<br/>
Cannot cross Kullervo’s pickets,<br/>
Nor the fences he has builded.”<br/>
Untamoinen left his mansion<br/>
To inspect the young boy’s labors,<br/>
View the fences of Kullervo;<br/>
Saw the fence without a pass-way,<br/>
Not a wicket in his fences;<br/>
From the earth the fence extended<br/>
To the highest clouds of heaven.<br/>
These the words of Untamoinen:<br/>
“For this work he is not fitted,<br/>
Useless is the fence thus builded;<br/>
Is so high that none can cross it,<br/>
And there is no passage through it:<br/>
He shall thresh the rye and barley.”<br/>
Young Kullervo, quick preparing<br/>
Made an oaken flail for threshing,<br/>
Threshed the rye to finest powder,<br/>
Threshed the barley into atoms,<br/>
And the straw to worthless fragments.<br/>
Untamoinen went at evening,<br/>
Went to see Kullervo’s threshing,<br/>
View the work of Kullerwoinen;<br/>
Found the rye was ground to powder,<br/>
Grains of barley crushed to atoms,<br/>
And the straw to worthless rubbish.<br/>
Untamoinen then grew angry,<br/>
Spake these words in bitter accents:<br/>
“Kullerwoinen as a workman<br/>
Is a miserable failure;<br/>
Whatsoever work he touches<br/>
Is but ruined by his witchcraft;<br/>
I shall carry him to Ehstland,<br/>
In Karyala I shall sell him<br/>
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
There to swing the heavy hammer.”<br/>
Untamoinen sells Kullervo,<br/>
Trades him off in far Karyala,<br/>
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
To the master of the metals,<br/>
This the sum received in payment:<br/>
Seven worn and worthless sickles,<br/>
Three old caldrons worse than useless,<br/>
Three old scythes, and hoes, and axes,<br/>
Recompense, indeed, sufficient<br/>
For a boy that will not labor<br/>
For the good of his employer.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap32"/>RUNE XXXII.<br/>
KULLERVO AS A SHEPHERD.</h2>
<p>Kullerwoinen, wizard-servant<br/>
Of the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Purchased slave from Untamoinen,<br/>
Magic son with sky-blue stockings,<br/>
With a head of golden ringlets,<br/>
In his shoes of marten-leather,<br/>
Waiting little, asked the blacksmith,<br/>
Asked the host for work at morning,<br/>
In the evening asked the hostess,<br/>
These the words of Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Give me work at early morning,<br/>
In the evening, occupation,<br/>
Labor worthy of thy servant.”<br/>
Then the wife of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Once the Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Thinking long, and long debating,<br/>
How to give the youth employment,<br/>
How the purchased slave could labor;<br/>
Finally a shepherd made him,<br/>
Made him keeper of her pastures;<br/>
But the over-scornful hostess,<br/>
Baked a biscuit for the herdsman,<br/>
Baked a loaf of wondrous thickness,<br/>
Baked the lower-half of oat-meal,<br/>
And the upper-half of barley,<br/>
Baked a flint-stone in the centre,<br/>
Poured around it liquid butter,<br/>
Then she gave it to the shepherd,<br/>
Food to still the herdsman’s hunger;<br/>
Thus she gave the youth instructions:<br/>
“Do not eat the bread in hunger,<br/>
Till the herd is in the woodlands!”<br/>
Then the wife of Ilmarinen<br/>
Sent her cattle to the pasture,<br/>
Thus addressing Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Drive the cows to yonder bowers,<br/>
To the birch-trees and the aspens,<br/>
That they there may feed and fatten,<br/>
Fill themselves with milk and butter,<br/>
In the open forest-pastures,<br/>
On the distant hills and mountains,<br/>
In the glens among the birch-trees,<br/>
In the lowlands with the aspens,<br/>
In the golden pine-tree forests,<br/>
In the thickets silver-laden.<br/>
“Guard them, thou O kind Creator,<br/>
Shield them, omnipresent Ukko,<br/>
Shelter them from every danger,<br/>
And protect them from all evil,<br/>
That they may not want, nor wander<br/>
From the paths of peace and plenty.<br/>
As at home Thou didst protect them<br/>
In the shelters and the hurdles,<br/>
Guard them now beneath the heavens,<br/>
Shelter them in woodland pastures,<br/>
That the herds may live and prosper<br/>
To the joy of Northland’s hostess,<br/>
And against the will of Lempo.<br/>
“If my herdsman prove unworthy,<br/>
If the shepherd-maids seem evil,<br/>
Let the pastures be their shepherds,<br/>
Let the alders guard the cattle,<br/>
Make the birch-tree their protector,<br/>
Let the willow drive them homeward,<br/>
Ere the hostess go to seek them,<br/>
Ere the milkmaids wait and worry.<br/>
Should the birch-tree not protect them,<br/>
Nor the aspen lend assistance,<br/>
Nor the linden be their keeper,<br/>
Nor the willow drive them homeward,<br/>
Wilt thou give them better herdsmen,<br/>
Let Creation’s beauteous daughters<br/>
Be their kindly shepherdesses.<br/>
Thou hast many lovely maidens,<br/>
Many hundreds that obey thee,<br/>
In the Ether’s spacious circles,<br/>
Beauteous daughters of creation.<br/>
“Summer-daughter, magic maiden,<br/>
Southern mother of the woodlands,<br/>
Pine-tree daughter, Kateyatar,<br/>
Pihlayatar, of the aspen,<br/>
Alder-maiden, Tapio’s daughter,<br/>
Daughter of the glen, Millikki,<br/>
And the mountain-maid, Tellervo,<br/>
Of my herds be ye protectors,<br/>
Keep them from the evil-minded,<br/>
Keep them safe in days of summer,<br/>
In the times of fragrant flowers,<br/>
While the tender leaves are whispering,<br/>
While the Earth is verdure-laden.<br/>
“Summer-daughter, charming maiden,<br/>
Southern mother of the woodlands,<br/>
Spread abroad thy robes of safety,<br/>
Spread thine apron o’er the forest,<br/>
Let it cover all my cattle,<br/>
And protect the unprotected,<br/>
That no evil winds may harm them,<br/>
May not suffer from the storm-clouds.<br/>
Guard my flocks from every danger,<br/>
Keep them from the hands of wild-beasts,<br/>
From the swamps with sinking pathways,<br/>
From the springs that bubble trouble,<br/>
From the swiftly running waters,<br/>
From the bottom of the whirlpool,<br/>
That they may not find misfortune,<br/>
May not wander to destruction,<br/>
In the marshes sink and perish,<br/>
Though against God’s best intentions,<br/>
Though against the will of Ukko.<br/>
“From a distance bring a bugle,<br/>
Bring a shepherd’s horn from heaven,<br/>
Bring the honey-flute of Ukko,<br/>
Play the music of creation,<br/>
Blow the pipes of the magician,<br/>
Play the flowers on the highlands,<br/>
Charm the hills, and dales, and mount<br/>
Charm the borders of the forest,<br/>
Fill the forest-trees with honey,<br/>
Fill with spice the fountain-borders.<br/>
“For my herds give food and shelter,<br/>
Feed them all on honeyed pastures,<br/>
Give them drink at honeyed fountains<br/>
Feed them on thy golden grasses,<br/>
On the leaves of silver saplings,<br/>
From the springs of life and beauty,<br/>
From the crystal-waters flowing,<br/>
From the waterfalls of Rutya,<br/>
From the uplands green and golden,<br/>
From the glens enriched in silver.<br/>
Dig thou also golden fountains<br/>
On the four sides of the willow,<br/>
That the cows may drink in sweetness,<br/>
And their udders swell with honey,<br/>
That their milk may flow in streamlets;<br/>
Let the milk be caught in vessels,<br/>
Let the cow’s gift be not wasted,<br/>
Be not given to Manala.<br/>
“Many are the sons of evil,<br/>
That to Mana take their milkings,<br/>
Give their milk to evil-doers,<br/>
Waste it in Tuoni’s empire;<br/>
Few there are, and they the worthy,<br/>
That can get the milk from Mana;<br/>
Never did my ancient mother<br/>
Ask for counsel in the village,<br/>
Never in the courts for wisdom;<br/>
She obtained her milk from Mana,<br/>
Took the sour-milk from the dealers,<br/>
Sweet-milk from the greater distance,<br/>
From the kingdom of Manala,<br/>
From Tuoni’s fields and pastures;<br/>
Brought it in the dusk of evening,<br/>
Through the by-ways in the darkness,<br/>
That the wicked should not know it,<br/>
That it should not find destruction.<br/>
“This the language of my mother,<br/>
And these words I also echo:<br/>
Whither does the cow’s gift wander,<br/>
Whither has the milk departed?<br/>
Has it gone to feed the strangers,<br/>
Banished to the distant village,<br/>
Gone to feed the hamlet-lover,<br/>
Or perchance to feed the forest,<br/>
Disappeared within the woodlands,<br/>
Scattered o’er the hills and mountains,<br/>
Mingled with the lakes and rivers?<br/>
It shall never go to Mana,<br/>
Never go to feed the stranger,<br/>
Never to the village-lover;<br/>
Neither shall it feed the forest,<br/>
Nor be lost upon the mountains,<br/>
Neither sprinkled in the woodlands,<br/>
Nor be mingled with the waters;<br/>
It is needed for our tables,<br/>
Worthy food for all our children.’<br/>
Summer-daughter, maid of beauty,<br/>
Southern daughter of Creation,<br/>
Give Suotikki tender fodder,<br/>
To Watikki, give pure water,<br/>
To Hermikki milk abundant,<br/>
Fresh provisions to Tuorikki,<br/>
From Mairikki let the milk flow,<br/>
Fresh milk from my cows in plenty,<br/>
Coming from the tips of grasses,<br/>
From the tender herbs and leaflets,<br/>
From the meadows rich in honey,<br/>
From the mother of the forest,<br/>
From the meadows sweetly dripping,<br/>
From the berry-laden branches,<br/>
From the heath of flower-maidens,<br/>
From the verdure, maiden bowers,<br/>
From the clouds of milk-providers,<br/>
From the virgin of the heavens,<br/>
That the milk may flow abundant<br/>
From the cows that I have given<br/>
To the keeping of Kullervo.<br/>
“Rise thou virgin of the valley,<br/>
From the springs arise in beauty,<br/>
Rise thou maiden of the fountain,<br/>
Beautiful, arise in ether,<br/>
Take the waters from the cloudlets,<br/>
And my roaming herds besprinkle,<br/>
That my cows may drink and flourish,<br/>
May be ready for the coming<br/>
Of the shepherdess of evening.<br/>
“O Millikki, forest-hostess,<br/>
Mother of the herds at pasture,<br/>
Send the tallest of thy servants,<br/>
Send the best of thine assistants,<br/>
That my herds may well be guarded,<br/>
Through the pleasant days of summer,<br/>
Given us by our Creator.<br/>
“Beauteous virgin of the woodlands,<br/>
Tapio’s most charming daughter,<br/>
Fair Tellervo, forest-maiden,<br/>
Softly clad in silken raiment,<br/>
Beautiful in golden ringlets,<br/>
Do thou give my herds protection,<br/>
In the Metsola dominions,<br/>
On the hills of Tapiola;<br/>
Shield them with thy hands of beauty,<br/>
Stroke them gently with thy fingers,<br/>
Give to them a golden lustre,<br/>
Make them shine like fins of salmon,<br/>
Grow them robes as soft as ermine.<br/>
“When the evening star brings darkness,<br/>
When appears the hour of twilight,<br/>
Send my lowing cattle homeward,<br/>
Milk within their vessels coursing,<br/>
Water on their backs in lakelets.<br/>
When the Sun has set in ocean,<br/>
When the evening-bird is singing,<br/>
Thus address my herds of cattle:<br/>
“Ye that carry horns, now hasten<br/>
To the sheds of Ilmarinen;<br/>
Ye enriched in milk go homeward,<br/>
To the hostess now in waiting,<br/>
Home, the better place for sleeping,<br/>
Forest-beds are full of danger;<br/>
When the evening comes in darkness,<br/>
Straightway journey to the milkmaids<br/>
Building fires to light the pathway<br/>
On the turf enriched in honey,<br/>
In the pastures berry-laden!<br/>
“Thou, O Tapio’s son, Nyrikki,<br/>
Forest-son, enrobed in purple,<br/>
Cut the fir-trees on the mountains,<br/>
Cut the pines with cones of beauty,<br/>
Lay them o’er the streams for bridges,<br/>
Cover well the sloughs of quicksand,<br/>
In the swamps and in the lowlands,<br/>
That my herd may pass in safety,<br/>
On their long and dismal journey,<br/>
To the clouds of smoke may hasten,<br/>
Where the milkmaids wait their coming.<br/>
If the cows heed not this order,<br/>
Do not hasten home at evening,<br/>
Then, O service-berry maiden,<br/>
Cut a birch-rod from the glenwood,<br/>
From the juniper, a whip-stick,<br/>
Near to Tapio’s spacious mansion,<br/>
Standing on the ash-tree mountain,<br/>
Drive my wayward, lowing cattle,<br/>
Into Metsola’s wide milk-yards,<br/>
When the evening-star is rising.<br/>
“Thou, O Otso, forest-apple,<br/>
Woodland bear, with honeyed fingers,<br/>
Let us make a lasting treaty,<br/>
Make a vow for future ages,<br/>
That thou wilt not kill my cattle,<br/>
Wilt not eat my milk-providers;<br/>
That I will not send my hunters<br/>
To destroy thee and thy kindred,<br/>
Never in the days of summer,<br/>
The Creator’s warmest season.<br/>
“Dost thou hear the tones of cow-bells,<br/>
Hear the calling of the bugles,<br/>
Ride thyself within the meadow,<br/>
Sink upon the turf in slumber,<br/>
Bury both thine ears in clover,<br/>
Crouch within some alder-thicket<br/>
Climb between the mossy ledges,<br/>
Visit thou some rocky cavern,<br/>
Flee away to other mountains,<br/>
Till thou canst not hear the cow-bells,<br/>
Nor the calling of the herdsmen.<br/>
“Listen, Otso of the woodlands,<br/>
Sacred bear with honeyed fingers,<br/>
To approach the herd of cattle<br/>
Thou thyself art not forbidden,<br/>
But thy tongue, and teeth, and fingers,<br/>
Must not touch my herd in summer,<br/>
Must not harm my harmless creatures.<br/>
Go around the scented meadows,<br/>
Amble through the milky pastures,<br/>
From the tones of bells and shepherds.<br/>
should the herd be on the mountain,<br/>
Go thou quickly to the marshes;<br/>
Should my cattle browse the lowlands,<br/>
Sleep thou then within the thicket;<br/>
Should they feed upon the uplands,<br/>
Thou must hasten to the valley;<br/>
Should the herd graze at the bottom,<br/>
Thou must feed upon the summit.<br/>
“Wander like the golden cuckoo,<br/>
Like the dove of silver brightness,<br/>
Like a little fish in ocean;<br/>
Ride thy claws within thy hair-foot,<br/>
Shut thy wicked teeth in darkness,<br/>
That my herd may not be frightened,<br/>
May not think themselves in danger.<br/>
Leave my cows in peace and plenty,<br/>
Let them journey home in order,<br/>
Through the vales and mountain by-ways,<br/>
Over plains and through the forest,<br/>
Harming not my harmless creatures.<br/>
“Call to mind our former pledges,<br/>
At the river of Tuoni,<br/>
Near the waterfall and whirlpool,<br/>
In the ears of our Creator.<br/>
Thrice to Otso was it granted,<br/>
In the circuit of the summer,<br/>
To approach the land of cow-bells,<br/>
Where the herdsmen’s voices echo;<br/>
But to thee it was not granted,<br/>
Otso never had permission<br/>
To attempt a wicked action,<br/>
To begin a work of evil.<br/>
Should the blinding thing of malice<br/>
Come upon thee in thy roamings,<br/>
Should thy bloody teeth feel hunger,<br/>
Throw thy malice to the mountains,<br/>
And thy hunger to the pine-trees,<br/>
Sink thy teeth within the aspens,<br/>
In the dead limbs of the birches,<br/>
Prune the dry stalks from the willows.<br/>
Should thy hunger still impel thee,<br/>
Go thou to the berry-mountain,<br/>
Eat the fungus of the forest,<br/>
Feed thy hunger on the ant-hills,<br/>
Eat the red roots of the bear-tree,<br/>
Metsola’s rich cakes of honey,<br/>
Not the grass my herd would feed on.<br/>
Or if Metsola’s rich honey<br/>
Should ferment before the eating,<br/>
On the hills of golden color,<br/>
On the mountains filled with silver,<br/>
There is other food for hunger,<br/>
Other drink for thirsting Otso,<br/>
Everlasting will the food be,<br/>
And the drink be never wanting.<br/>
“Let us now agree in honor,<br/>
And conclude a lasting treaty<br/>
That our lives may end in pleasure,<br/>
May be, merry in the summer,<br/>
Both enjoy the woods in common,<br/>
Though our food must be distinctive<br/>
Shouldst thou still desire to fight me,<br/>
Let our contests be in winter,<br/>
Let our wars be, on the snow-fields.<br/>
Swamps will thaw in days of summer,<br/>
Warm, the water in the rivers.<br/>
Therefore shouldst thou break this treaty,<br/>
Shouldst thou come where golden cattle<br/>
Roam these woodland hills and valleys,<br/>
We will slay thee with our cross-bows;<br/>
Should our arrow-men be absent,<br/>
We have here some archer-women,<br/>
And among them is the hostess,<br/>
That can use the fatal weapon,<br/>
That can bring thee to destruction,<br/>
Thus will end the days of trouble<br/>
That thou bringest to our people,<br/>
And against the will of Ukko.<br/>
“Ukko, ruler in the heavens,<br/>
Lend an ear to my entreaty,<br/>
Metamorphose all my cattle,<br/>
Through the mighty force of magic,<br/>
Into stumps and stones convert them,<br/>
If the enemy should wander,<br/>
Near my herd in days of summer.<br/>
“If I had been born an Otso,<br/>
I would never stride and amble<br/>
At the feet of aged women;<br/>
Elsewhere there are hills and valleys,<br/>
Farther on are honey-pastures,<br/>
Where the lazy bear may wander,<br/>
Where the indolent may linger;<br/>
Sneak away to yonder mountain,<br/>
That thy tender flesh may lessen,<br/>
In the blue-glen’s deep recesses,<br/>
In the bear-dens of the forest,<br/>
Thou canst move through fields of acorns,<br/>
Through the sand and ocean-pebbles,<br/>
There for thee is tracked a pathway,<br/>
Through the woodlands on the sea-coast,<br/>
To the Northland’s farthest limits,<br/>
To the dismal plains of Lapland,<br/>
There ’tis well for thee to lumber,<br/>
There to live will be a pleasure.<br/>
Shoeless there to walk in summer,<br/>
Stockingless in days of autumn,<br/>
On the blue-back of the mountain,<br/>
Through the swamps and fertile lowlands.<br/>
“If thou canst not journey thither,<br/>
Canst not find the Lapland-highway,<br/>
Hasten on a little distance,<br/>
In the bear-path leading northward.<br/>
To the grove of Tuonela,<br/>
To the honey-plains of Kalma,<br/>
Swamps there are in which to wander,<br/>
Heaths in which to roam at pleasure,<br/>
There are Kiryos, there are Karyos,<br/>
And of beasts a countless number,<br/>
With their fetters strong as iron,<br/>
Fattening within the forest.<br/>
Be ye gracious, groves and mountains,<br/>
Full of grace, ye darksome thickets,<br/>
Peace and, plenty to my cattle,<br/>
Through the pleasant days of summer,<br/>
The Creator’s warmest season.<br/>
“Knippana, O King of forests,<br/>
Thou the gray-beard of the woodlands,<br/>
Watch thy dogs in fen and fallow,<br/>
Lay a sponge within one nostril,<br/>
And an acorn in the other,<br/>
That they may not scent my cattle;<br/>
Tie their eyes with silken fillets,<br/>
That they may not see my herdlings,<br/>
May not see my cattle grazing.<br/>
“Should all this seem inefficient,<br/>
Drive away thy barking children,<br/>
Let them run to other forests,<br/>
Let them hunt in other marshes,<br/>
From these verdant strips of meadow,<br/>
From these far outstretching borders,<br/>
Hide thy dogs within thy caverns,<br/>
Firmly tie thy yelping children,<br/>
Tie them with thy golden fetters,<br/>
With thy chains adorned with silver,<br/>
That they may not do me damage,’<br/>
May not do a deed of mischief.<br/>
Should all this prove inefficient,<br/>
Thou, O Ukko, King of heaven.<br/>
Wise director, full of mercy,<br/>
Hear the golden words I utter,<br/>
Hear a voice that breathes affection,<br/>
From the alder make a muzzle,<br/>
For each dog, within the kennel;<br/>
Should the alder prove too feeble,<br/>
Cast a band of purest copper;<br/>
Should the copper prove a failure,<br/>
Forge a band of ductile iron;<br/>
Should the iron snap asunder,<br/>
In each nose a small-ring fasten,<br/>
Made of molten gold and silver,<br/>
Chain thy dogs in forest-caverns,<br/>
That my herd may not be injured.<br/>
Then the wife of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Life-companion of the blacksmith,<br/>
Opened all her yards and stables,<br/>
Led her herd across the meadow,<br/>
Placed them in the herdman’s keeping,<br/>
In the care of Kullerwoinen.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap33"/>RUNE XXXIII.<br/>
KULLERVO AND THE CHEAT-CAKE.</h2>
<p>Thereupon the lad, Kullervo,<br/>
Laid his luncheon in his basket,<br/>
Drove the herd to mountain-pastures,<br/>
O’er the hills and through the marshes,<br/>
To their grazings in the woodlands,<br/>
Speaking as he careless wandered:<br/>
“Of the youth am I the poorest,<br/>
Hapless lad and full of trouble,<br/>
Evil luck to me befallen!<br/>
I alas! must idly wander<br/>
O’er the hills and through the valleys,<br/>
As a watch-dog for the cattle!”<br/>
Then she sat upon the greensward,<br/>
In a sunny spot selected,<br/>
Singing, chanting words as follow:<br/>
“Shine, O shine, thou Sun of heaven,<br/>
Cast thy rays, thou fire of Ukko,<br/>
On the herdsman of the blacksmith,<br/>
On the head of Kullerwoinen,<br/>
On this poor and luckless shepherd,<br/>
Not in Ilmarinen’s smithy,<br/>
Nor the dwellings of his people;<br/>
Good the table of the hostess,<br/>
Cuts the best of wheaten biscuit,<br/>
Honey-cakes she cuts in slices,<br/>
Spreading each with golden butter;<br/>
Only dry bread has the herdsman,<br/>
Eats with pain the oaten bread-crusts,’<br/>
Filled with chaff his and biscuit,<br/>
Feeds upon the worst of straw-bread,<br/>
Pine-tree bark, the broad he feeds on,<br/>
Sipping water from the birch-bark,<br/>
Drinking from the tips of grasses I<br/>
Go, O Sun, and go, O barley,<br/>
Haste away, thou light of Ukko,<br/>
Hide within the mountain pine-trees,<br/>
Go, O wheat, to yonder thickets,<br/>
To the trees of purple berries,<br/>
To the junipers and alders,<br/>
Safely lead the herdsman homeward<br/>
To the biscuit golden-buttered,<br/>
To the honeyed cakes and viands!”<br/>
While the shepherd lad was singing<br/>
Kullerwoinen’s song and echo,<br/>
Ilmarinen’s wife was feasting<br/>
On the sweetest bread of Northland,<br/>
On the toothsome cakes of barley,<br/>
On the richest of provisions;<br/>
Only laid aside some cabbage,<br/>
For the herdsman, Kullerwoinen;<br/>
Set apart some wasted fragments,<br/>
Leavings of the dogs at dinner,<br/>
For the shepherd, home returning.<br/>
From the woods a bird came flying,<br/>
Sang this song to Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“’Tis the time for forest-dinners,<br/>
For the fatherless companion<br/>
Of the herds to eat his viands,<br/>
Eat the good things from his basket!”<br/>
Kullerwoinen heard the songster,<br/>
Looked upon the Sun’s long shadow,<br/>
Straightway spake the words that follow:<br/>
“True, the singing of the song-bird,<br/>
It is time indeed for feasting,<br/>
Time to eat my basket-dinner.”<br/>
Thereupon young Kullerwoinen<br/>
Called his herd to rest in safety,<br/>
Sat upon a grassy hillock,<br/>
Took his basket from his shoulders,<br/>
Took therefrom the arid oat-loaf,<br/>
Turned it over in his fingers,<br/>
Carefully the loaf inspected,<br/>
Spake these words of ancient wisdom:<br/>
“Many loaves are fine to look on,<br/>
On the outside seem delicious,<br/>
On the inside, chaff and tan-bark!”<br/>
Then the shepherd, Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Drew his knife to cut his oat-loaf,<br/>
Cut the hard and arid biscuit;<br/>
Cuts against a stone imprisoned,<br/>
Well imbedded in the centre,<br/>
Breaks his ancient knife in pieces;<br/>
When the shepherd youth, Kullervo,<br/>
Saw his magic knife had broken,<br/>
Weeping sore, he spake as follows:<br/>
“This, the blade that I bold sacred,<br/>
This the one thing that I honor,<br/>
Relic of my mother’s people!<br/>
On the stone within this oat-loaf,<br/>
On this cheat-cake of the hostess,<br/>
I my precious knife have broken.<br/>
How shall I repay this insult,<br/>
How avenge this woman’s malice,<br/>
What the wages for deception?”<br/>
From a tree the raven answered:<br/>
“O thou little silver buckle,<br/>
Only son of old Kalervo,<br/>
Why art thou in evil humor,<br/>
Wherefore sad in thy demeanor?<br/>
Take a young shoot from the thicket,<br/>
Take a birch-rod from the valley,<br/>
Drive thy herd across the lowlands,<br/>
Through the quicksands of the marshes;<br/>
To the wolves let one half wander,<br/>
To the bear-dens, lead the other;<br/>
Sing the forest wolves together,<br/>
Sing the bears down from the mountains,<br/>
Call the wolves thy little children,<br/>
And the bears thy standard-bearers;<br/>
Drive them like a cow-herd homeward,<br/>
Drive them home like spotted cattle,<br/>
Drive them to thy master’s milk-yards;<br/>
Thus thou wilt repay the hostess<br/>
For her malice and derision.”<br/>
Thereupon the wizard answered,<br/>
These the words of Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Wait, yea wait, thou bride of Hisi!<br/>
Do I mourn my mother’s relic,<br/>
Mourn the keep-sake thou hast broken?<br/>
Thou thyself shalt mourn as sorely<br/>
When thy, cows come home at evening!”<br/>
From the tree he cuts a birch-wand,<br/>
From the juniper a whip-stick,<br/>
Drives the herd across the lowlands,<br/>
Through the quicksands of the marshes,<br/>
To the wolves lets one half wander,<br/>
To the bear-dens leads the other;<br/>
Calls the wolves his little children,<br/>
Calls the bears his standard-bearers,<br/>
Changes all his herd of cattle<br/>
Into wolves and bears by magic.<br/>
In the west the Sun is shining,<br/>
Telling that the night is coming.<br/>
Quick the wizard, Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Wanders o’er the pine-tree mountain,<br/>
Hastens through the forest homeward,<br/>
Drives the wolves and bears before him<br/>
Toward the milk-yards of the hostess;<br/>
To the herd he speaks as follows,<br/>
As they journey on together:<br/>
“Tear and kill the wicked hostess,<br/>
Tear her guilty flesh in pieces,<br/>
When she comes to view her cattle,<br/>
When she stoops to do her milking!”<br/>
Then the wizard, Kullerwoinen,<br/>
From an ox-bone makes a bugle,<br/>
Makes it from Tuonikki’s cow-horn,<br/>
Makes a flute from Kiryo’s shin-bone,<br/>
Plays a song upon his bugle,<br/>
Plays upon his flute of magic,<br/>
Thrice upon the home-land hill-tops,<br/>
Six times near the coming gate-ways.<br/>
Ilmarinen’s wife and hostess<br/>
Long had waited for the coming<br/>
Of her herd with Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Waited for the milk at evening,<br/>
Waited for the new-made butter,<br/>
Heard the footsteps in the cow-path,<br/>
On the heath she beard the bustle,<br/>
Spake these joyous words of welcome:<br/>
“Be thou praised, O gracious Ukko,<br/>
That my herd is home returning!<br/>
But I hear a bugle sounding,<br/>
’Tis the playing of my herdsman,<br/>
Playing on a magic cow-horn,<br/>
Bursting all our ears with music!”<br/>
Kullerwoinen, drawing nearer,<br/>
To the hostess spake as follows:<br/>
“Found the bugle in the woodlands,<br/>
And the flute among the rushes;<br/>
All thy herd are in the passage,<br/>
All thy cows within the hurdles,<br/>
This the time to build the camp-fire,<br/>
This the time to do the milking!”<br/>
Ilmarinen’s wife, the hostess,<br/>
Thus addressed an aged servant:<br/>
“Go, thou old one, to the milking,<br/>
Have the care of all my cattle,<br/>
Do not ask for mine assistance,<br/>
Since I have to knead the biscuit.”<br/>
Kullerwoinen spake as follows:<br/>
“Always does the worthy hostess,<br/>
Ever does the wisdom-mother<br/>
Go herself and do the milking,<br/>
Tend the cows within the hurdles!”<br/>
Then the wife of Ilmarinen<br/>
Built a field-fire in the passage,<br/>
Went to milk her cows awaiting,<br/>
Looked upon her herd in wonder,<br/>
Spake these happy words of greeting:<br/>
“Beautiful, my herd of cattle,<br/>
Glistening like the skins of lynxes,<br/>
Hair as soft as fur of ermine,<br/>
Peaceful waiting for the milk-pail!”<br/>
On the milk-stool sits the hostess,<br/>
Milks one moment, then a second,<br/>
Then a third time milks and ceases;<br/>
When the bloody wolves disguising,<br/>
Quick attack the hostess milking,<br/>
And the bears lend their assistance,<br/>
Tear and mutilate her body<br/>
With their teeth and sharpened fingers.<br/>
Kullerwoinen, cruel wizard,<br/>
Thus repaid the wicked hostess,<br/>
Thus repaid her evil treatment.<br/>
Quick the wife of Ilmarinen<br/>
Cried aloud in bitter anguish,<br/>
Thus addressed the youth, Kullervo:<br/>
“Evil son, thou bloody herdsman,<br/>
Thou hast brought me wolves in malice,<br/>
Driven bears within my hurdles!<br/>
These the words of Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Have I evil done as shepherd,<br/>
Worse the conduct of the hostess;<br/>
Baked a stone inside my oat-cake,<br/>
On the inside, rock and tan-bark,<br/>
On the stone my knife, was broken,<br/>
Treasure of my mother’s household,<br/>
Broken virtue of my people!”<br/>
Ilmarinen’s wife made answer:<br/>
“Noble herdsman, Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Change, I pray thee, thine opinion,<br/>
Take away thine incantations,<br/>
From the bears and wolves release me,<br/>
Save me from this spell of torture<br/>
I will give thee better raiment,<br/>
Give the best of milk and butter,<br/>
Set for thee the sweetest table;<br/>
Thou shalt live with me in welcome,<br/>
Need not labor for thy keeping.<br/>
If thou dost not free me quickly,<br/>
Dost not break this spell of magic,<br/>
I shall sink into the Death-land,<br/>
Shall return to Tuonela.”<br/>
This is Kullerwoinen’s answer:<br/>
“It is best that thou shouldst perish,<br/>
Let destruction overtake thee,<br/>
There is ample room in Mana,<br/>
Room for all the dead in Kalma,<br/>
There the worthiest must slumber,<br/>
There must rest the good and evil.”<br/>
Ilmarinen’s wife made answer:<br/>
“Ukko, thou O God in heaven,<br/>
Span the strongest of thy cross-bows,<br/>
Test the weapon by thy wisdom,<br/>
Lay an arrow forged from copper,<br/>
On the cross-bow of thy forging;<br/>
Rightly aim thy flaming arrow,<br/>
With thy magic hurl the missile,<br/>
Shoot this wizard through the vitals,<br/>
Pierce the heart of Kullerwoinen<br/>
With the lightning of the heavens,<br/>
With thine arrows tipped with copper.”<br/>
Kullerwoinen prays as follows:<br/>
“Ukko, God of truth and justice.<br/>
Do not slay thy magic servant,<br/>
Slay the wife of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Kill in her the worst of women,<br/>
In these hurdles let her perish,<br/>
Lest she wander hence in freedom,<br/>
To perform some other mischief,<br/>
Do some greater deed of malice!”<br/>
Quick as lightning fell the hostess,<br/>
Quick the wife of Ilmarinen<br/>
Fell and perished in the hurdles,<br/>
On the ground before her cottage<br/>
Thus the death of Northland’s hostess,<br/>
Cherished wife of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Once the Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Wooed and watched for many summers,<br/>
Pride and joy of Kalevala!</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap34"/>RUNE XXXIV.<br/>
KULLERVO FINDS HIS TRIBE-FOLK.</h2>
<p>Kullerwoinen, young magician,<br/>
In his beauteous, golden ringlets,<br/>
In his magic shoes of deer-skin,<br/>
Left the home of Ilmarinen<br/>
Wandered forth upon his journey,<br/>
Ere the blacksmith heard the tidings<br/>
Of the cruel death and torture<br/>
Of his wife and joy-companion,<br/>
Lest a bloody fight should follow.<br/>
Kullerwoinen left the smithy,<br/>
Blowing on his magic bugle,<br/>
Joyful left the lands of Ilma,<br/>
Blowing blithely on the heather,<br/>
Made the distant hills re-echo,<br/>
Made the swamps and mountains tremble,<br/>
Made the heather-blossoms answer<br/>
To the music of his cow-horn,<br/>
In its wild reverberations,<br/>
To the magic of his playing.<br/>
Songs were heard within the smithy,<br/>
And the blacksmith stopped and listened,<br/>
Hastened to the door and window,<br/>
Hastened to the open court-yard,<br/>
If perchance he might discover<br/>
What was playing on the heather,<br/>
What was sounding through the forest.<br/>
Quick he learned the cruel story,<br/>
Learned the cause of the rejoicing,<br/>
Saw the hostess dead before him,<br/>
Knew his beauteous wife had perished,<br/>
Saw the lifeless form extended,<br/>
In the court-yard of his dwelling.<br/>
Thereupon the metal-artist<br/>
Fell to bitter tears and wailings,<br/>
Wept through all the dreary night-time,<br/>
Deep the grief that settled o’er him,<br/>
Black as night his darkened future,<br/>
Could not stay his tears of sorrow.<br/>
Kullerwoinen hastened onward,<br/>
Straying, roaming, hither, thither,<br/>
Wandered on through field and forest,<br/>
O’er the Hisi-plains and woodlands.<br/>
When the darkness settled o’er him,<br/>
When the bird of night was flitting,<br/>
Sat the fatherless at evening,<br/>
The forsaken sat and rested<br/>
On a hillock of the forest.<br/>
Thus he murmured, heavy-hearted:<br/>
“Why was I, alas! created,<br/>
Why was I so ill-begotten,<br/>
Since for months and years I wander,<br/>
Lost among the ether-spaces?<br/>
Others have their homes to dwell in,<br/>
Others hasten to their firesides<br/>
As the evening gathers round them:<br/>
But my home is in the forest,<br/>
And my bed upon the heather,<br/>
And my bath-room is the rain-cloud.<br/>
“Never didst thou, God of mercy,<br/>
Never in the course of ages,<br/>
Give an infant birth unwisely;<br/>
Wherefore then was I created,<br/>
Fatherless to roam in ether,<br/>
Motherless and lone to wander?<br/>
Thou, O Ukko, art my father,<br/>
Thou hast given me form and feature;<br/>
As the sea-gull on the ocean,<br/>
As the duck upon the waters,<br/>
Shines the Sun upon the swallow,<br/>
Shines as bright upon the sparrow,<br/>
Gives the joy-birds song and gladness,<br/>
Does not shine on me unhappy;<br/>
Nevermore will shine the sunlight,<br/>
Never will the moonlight glimmer<br/>
On this hapless son and orphan;<br/>
Do not know my hero-father,<br/>
Cannot tell who was my mother;<br/>
On the shore, perhaps the gray-duck<br/>
Left me in the sand to perish.<br/>
Young was I and small of stature,<br/>
When my mother left me orphaned;<br/>
Dead, my father and my mother,<br/>
Dead, my honored tribe of heroes;<br/>
Shoes they left me that are icy,<br/>
Stockings filled with frosts of ages,<br/>
Let me on the freezing ice-plains<br/>
Fall to perish in the rushes;<br/>
From the giddy heights of mountains<br/>
Let me tumble to destruction.<br/>
“O, thou wise and good Creator,<br/>
Why my birth and what my service?<br/>
I shall never fall and perish<br/>
On the ice-plains, in the marshes,<br/>
Never be a bridge in swamp-land,<br/>
Not while I have arms of virtue<br/>
That can serve my honored kindred!”<br/>
Then Kullervo thought to journey<br/>
To the village of Untamo,<br/>
To avenge his father’s murder,<br/>
To avenge his mother’s tortures,<br/>
And the troubles of his tribe-folk.<br/>
These the words of Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Wait, yea wait, thou Untamoinen,<br/>
Thou destroyer of my people;<br/>
When I meet thee in the combat,<br/>
I will slay thee and thy kindred,<br/>
I will burn thy homes to ashes!”<br/>
Came a woman on the highway,<br/>
Dressed in blue, the aged mother,<br/>
To Kullervo spake as follows:<br/>
“Whither goest, Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Whither hastes the wayward hero?<br/>
Kullerwoinen gave this answer:<br/>
“I have thought that I would journey<br/>
To the far-off land of strangers,<br/>
To the village of Untamo,<br/>
To avenge my father’s murder,<br/>
To avenge my mother’s tortures,<br/>
And the troubles of my tribe-folk.”<br/>
Thus the gray-haired woman answered:<br/>
“Surely thou dost rest in error,<br/>
For thy tribe has never perished,<br/>
And thy mother still is living<br/>
With thy father in the Northland,<br/>
Living with the old Kalervo.”<br/>
“O, thou ancient dame beloved,<br/>
Worthy mother of the woodlands,<br/>
Tell me where my father liveth,<br/>
Where my loving mother lingers!”<br/>
“Yonder lives thine aged father,<br/>
And thy loving mother with him,<br/>
On the farthest shore of Northland,<br/>
On the long-point of the fish-lake!”<br/>
“Tell me, O thou woodland-mother,<br/>
How to journey to my people,<br/>
How to find mine honored tribe-folk.”<br/>
“Easy is the way for strangers:<br/>
Thou must journey through the forest,<br/>
Hasten to the river-border,<br/>
Travel one day, then a second,<br/>
And the third from morn till even,<br/>
To the north-west, thou must journey.<br/>
If a mountain comes to meet thee,<br/>
Go around the nearing mountain,<br/>
Westward bold thy weary journey,<br/>
Till thou comest to a river,<br/>
On thy right hand flowing eastward;<br/>
Travel to the river border,<br/>
Where three water-falls will greet thee;<br/>
When thou comest to a headland,<br/>
On the point thou’lt see a cottage<br/>
Where the fishermen assemble;<br/>
In this cottage is thy father,<br/>
With thy mother and her daughters,<br/>
Beautiful thy maiden sisters.”<br/>
Kullerwoinen, the magician,<br/>
Hastens northward on his journey,<br/>
Walks one day, and then a second,<br/>
Walks the third from morn till evening;<br/>
To the north-west walks Kullervo,<br/>
Till a mountain comes to meet him,<br/>
Walks around the nearing mountain;<br/>
Westward, westward, holds his journey,<br/>
Till he sees a river coming;<br/>
Hastens to the river border,<br/>
Walks along the streams and rapids<br/>
Till three waterfalls accost him;<br/>
Travels till he meets a headland,<br/>
On the point he spies a cottage,<br/>
Where the fishermen assemble.<br/>
Quick he journeys to the cabin,<br/>
Quick he passes through the portals<br/>
Of the cottage on the headland,<br/>
Where he finds his long-lost kindred;<br/>
No one knows the youth, Kullervo,<br/>
No one knows whence comes the stranger,<br/>
Where his home, nor where he goeth.<br/>
These the words of young Kullervo:<br/>
“Dost thou know me not, my mother,<br/>
Dost thou know me not, my father?<br/>
I am hapless Kullerwoinen<br/>
Whom the heroes of Untamo<br/>
Carried to their distant country,<br/>
When my height was but a hand-breadth.”<br/>
Quick the hopeful mother answers:<br/>
“O my worthy son, beloved,<br/>
O my precious silver-buckle,<br/>
Hast thou with thy mind of magic,<br/>
Wandered through the fields of Northland<br/>
Searching for thy home and kindred?<br/>
As one dead I long have mourned thee,<br/>
Had supposed thee, in Manala.<br/>
Once I had two sons and heroes,<br/>
Had two good and beauteous daughters,<br/>
Two of these have long been absent,<br/>
Elder son and elder daughter;<br/>
For the wars my son departed,<br/>
While my daughter strayed and perished<br/>
If my son is home returning,<br/>
Yet my daughter still is absent,<br/>
Kullerwoinen asked his mother:<br/>
“Whither did my sister wander,<br/>
What direction did she journey?<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“This the story of thy sister:<br/>
Went for berries to the woodlands,<br/>
To the mountains went my daughter,<br/>
Where the lovely maiden vanished,<br/>
Where my pretty berry perished,<br/>
Died some death beyond my knowledge,<br/>
Nameless is the death she suffered.<br/>
Who is mourning for the daughter?<br/>
No one mourns her as her mother,<br/>
Walks and wanders, mourns and searches,<br/>
For her fairest child and daughter;<br/>
Therefore did the mother wander,<br/>
Searching for thy lovely sister,<br/>
Like the bear she roamed the forest,<br/>
Ran the glenways like the adder,<br/>
Searched one day and then a second,<br/>
Searched the third from morn till even,<br/>
Till she reached the mountain-summit,<br/>
There she called and called her daughter,<br/>
Till the distant mountains answered,<br/>
Called to her who had departed:<br/>
I Where art thou, my lovely maiden,<br/>
Come my daughter to thy mother!’<br/>
“Thus I called, and sought thy sister,<br/>
This the answer of the mountains,<br/>
Thus the hills and valleys echoed:<br/>
‘Call no more, thou weeping mother,<br/>
Weep no more for the departed;<br/>
Nevermore in all thy lifetime,<br/>
Never in the course of ages,<br/>
Will she join again her kindred,<br/>
At her brother’s landing-places,<br/>
In her father’s humble dwelling.’”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap35"/>RUNE XXXV.<br/>
KULLERVO’S EVIL DEEDS.</h2>
<p>Kullerwionen, youthful wizard,<br/>
In his blue and scarlet stockings,<br/>
Henceforth lingered with his parents;<br/>
But he could not change his nature,<br/>
Could not gain a higher wisdom,<br/>
Could not win a better judgment;<br/>
As a child he was ill-nurtured,<br/>
Early rocked in stupid cradles,<br/>
By a nurse of many follies,<br/>
By a minister of evil.<br/>
To his work went Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Strove to make his labors worthy;<br/>
First, Kullervo went a-fishing,<br/>
Set his fishing-nets in ocean;<br/>
With his hands upon the row-locks,<br/>
Kullerwoinen spake as follows:<br/>
“Shall I pull with all my forces,<br/>
Pull with strength of youthful heroes,<br/>
Or with weakness of the aged?”<br/>
From the stern arose a gray-beard,<br/>
And he answered thus Kullervo:<br/>
“Pull with all thy youthful vigor;<br/>
Shouldst thou row with magic power,<br/>
Thou couldst not destroy this vessel,<br/>
Couldst not row this boat to fragments.”<br/>
Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,<br/>
Rowed with all his youthful vigor,<br/>
With the mighty force of magic,<br/>
Rowed the bindings from the vessel,<br/>
Ribs of juniper he shattered,<br/>
Rowed the aspen-oars to pieces.<br/>
When the aged sire, Kalervo,<br/>
Saw the work of Kullerwoinen,<br/>
He addressed his son as follows:<br/>
“Dost not understand the rowing;<br/>
Thou hast burst the bands asunder,<br/>
Bands of juniper and willow,<br/>
Rowed my aspen-boat to pieces;<br/>
To the fish-nets drive the salmon,<br/>
This, perchance, will suit thee better.”<br/>
Thereupon the son, Kullervo,<br/>
Hastened to his work as bidden,<br/>
Drove the salmon to the fish-nets,<br/>
Spake in innocence as follows:<br/>
“Shall I with my youthful vigor<br/>
Scare the salmon to the fish-nets,<br/>
Or with little magic vigor<br/>
Shall I drive them to their capture?<br/>
Spake the master of the fish-nets:<br/>
“That would be but work of women,<br/>
Shouldst thou use but little power<br/>
In the frighting of the salmon!”<br/>
Kullerwoinen does as bidden,<br/>
Scares the salmon with the forces<br/>
Of his mighty arms and shoulders,<br/>
With the strength of youth and magic,<br/>
Stirs the water thick with black-earth,<br/>
Beats the scare-net into pieces,<br/>
Into pulp he beats the salmon.<br/>
When the aged sire, Kalervo,<br/>
Saw the work of Kullerwoinen,<br/>
To his son these words he uttered:<br/>
“Dost not understand this labor,<br/>
For this work thou art not suited,<br/>
Canst not scare the perch and salmon<br/>
To the fish-nets of thy father;<br/>
Thou hast ruined all my fish-nets,<br/>
Torn my scare-net into tatters,<br/>
Beaten into pulp the whiting,<br/>
Torn my net-props into fragments,<br/>
Beaten into bits my wedges.<br/>
Leave the fishing to another;<br/>
See if thou canst pay the tribute,<br/>
Pay my yearly contribution;<br/>
See if thou canst better travel,<br/>
On the way show better judgment!”<br/>
Thereupon the son, Kullervo,<br/>
Hapless youth in purple vestments,<br/>
In his magic shoes of deer-skin,<br/>
In his locks of golden color,<br/>
Sallied forth to pay the taxes,<br/>
Pay the tribute for his people.<br/>
When the youth had paid the tribute,<br/>
Paid the yearly contribution,<br/>
He returned to join the snow-sledge,<br/>
Took his place upon the cross-bench,<br/>
Snapped his whip above the courser,<br/>
And began his journey homeward;<br/>
Rattled on along the highway,<br/>
Measured as he galloped onward<br/>
Wainamoinen’s hills and valleys,<br/>
And his fields in cultivation.<br/>
Came a golden maid to meet him,<br/>
On her snow-shoes came a virgin,<br/>
O’er the hills of Wainamoinen,<br/>
O’er his cultivated lowlands.<br/>
Quick the wizard-son, Kullervo,<br/>
Checked the motion of his racer,<br/>
Thus addressed the charming maiden<br/>
“Come, sweet maiden, to my snow-sledge,<br/>
In my fur-robes rest and linger!”<br/>
As she ran, the maiden answered:<br/>
“Let the Death-maid sit beside thee,<br/>
Rest and linger in thy fur-robes!”<br/>
Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,<br/>
Snapped his whip above the courser;<br/>
Fleet as wind he gallops homeward,<br/>
Dashes down along the highway;<br/>
With the roar of falling waters,<br/>
Gallops onward, onward, onward,<br/>
O’er the broad-back of the ocean,<br/>
O’er the icy plains of Lapland.<br/>
Comes a winsome maid to meet him,<br/>
Golden-haired, and wearing snow-shoes,<br/>
On the far outstretching ice-plains;<br/>
Quick the wizard checks his racer,<br/>
Charmingly accosts the maiden,<br/>
Chanting carefully these measures:<br/>
“Come, thou beauty, to my snow-sledge,<br/>
Hither come, and rest, and linger!<br/>
Tauntingly the maiden answered:<br/>
“Take Tuoni to thy snow-sledge,<br/>
At thy side let Manalainen<br/>
Sit with thee, and rest, and linger!”<br/>
Quick the wizard, Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Struck his fiery, prancing racer,<br/>
With the birch-whip of his father.<br/>
Like the lightning flew the fleet-foot,<br/>
Galloped on the highway homeward;<br/>
O’er the hills the snow-sledge bounded,<br/>
And the coming mountains trembled.<br/>
Kullerwoinen, wild magician,<br/>
Measures, on his journey homeward,<br/>
Northland’s far-extending borders,<br/>
And the fertile plains of Pohya.<br/>
Comes a beauteous maid to meet him,<br/>
With a tin-pin on her bosom,<br/>
On the heather of Pohyola,<br/>
O’er the Pohya-hills and moorlands.<br/>
Quick the wizard son, Kullervo,<br/>
Holds the bridle of his courser,<br/>
Charmingly intones these measures:<br/>
“Come, fair maiden, to my snow-sledge,<br/>
In these fur-robes rest, and linger;<br/>
Eat with me the golden apples,<br/>
Eat the hazel-nut in joyance,<br/>
Drink with me the beer delicious,<br/>
Eat the dainties that I give thee.”<br/>
This the answer of the maiden<br/>
With the tin-pin on her bosom:<br/>
“I have scorn to give thy snow-sledge,<br/>
Scorn for thee, thou wicked wizard;<br/>
Cold is it beneath thy fur-robes,<br/>
And thy sledge is chill and cheerless.<br/>
Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,<br/>
Wicked wizard of the Northland,<br/>
Drew the maiden to his snow-sledge,<br/>
Drew her to a seat beside him,<br/>
Quickly in his furs enwrapped her;<br/>
And the tin-adorned made answer,<br/>
These the accents of the maiden:<br/>
“Loose me from thy magic power,<br/>
Let me leave at once thy presence,<br/>
Lest I speak in wicked accents,<br/>
Lest I say the prayer of evil;<br/>
Free me now as I command thee,<br/>
Or I’ll tear thy sledge to pieces,<br/>
Throw these fur-robes to the north-winds.”<br/>
Straightway wicked Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Evil wizard and magician,<br/>
Opens all his treasure-boxes,<br/>
Shows the maiden gold and silver,<br/>
Shows her silken wraps of beauty,<br/>
Silken hose with golden borders,<br/>
Golden belts with silver buckles,<br/>
Jewelry that dims the vision,<br/>
Blunts the conscience of the virgin.<br/>
Silver leads one to destruction,<br/>
Gold entices from uprightness.<br/>
Kullerwoinen, wicked wizard,<br/>
Flatters lovingly the maiden,<br/>
One hand on the reins of leather,<br/>
One upon the maiden’s shoulder;<br/>
Thus they journey through the evening,<br/>
Pass the night in merry-making.<br/>
When the day-star led the morning,<br/>
When the second day was dawning,<br/>
Then the maid addressed Kullervo,<br/>
Questioned thus the wicked wizard:<br/>
“Of what tribe art thou descended,<br/>
Of what race thy hero-father?<br/>
Tell thy lineage and kindred.`<br/>
This, Kullervo’s truthful answer:<br/>
“Am not from a mighty nation,<br/>
Not the greatest, nor the smallest,<br/>
But my lineage is worthy:<br/>
Am Kalervo’s son of folly,<br/>
Am a child of contradictions,<br/>
Hapless son of cold misfortune.<br/>
Tell me of thy race of heroes,<br/>
Tell thine origin and kindred.”<br/>
This the answer of the maiden:<br/>
“Came not from a race primeval,<br/>
Not the largest, nor the smallest,<br/>
But my lineage is worthy;<br/>
Am Kalervo’s wretched daughter,<br/>
Am his long-lost child of error,<br/>
Am a maid of contradictions,<br/>
Hapless daughter of misfortune.<br/>
“When a child I lived in plenty<br/>
In the dwellings of my mother;<br/>
To the woods I went for berries,<br/>
Went for raspberries to uplands,<br/>
Gathered strawberries on mountains,<br/>
Gathered one day then a second;<br/>
But, alas! upon the third day,<br/>
Could not find the pathway homeward,<br/>
Forestward the highways led me,<br/>
All the footpaths, to the woodlands.<br/>
Long I sat in bitter weeping,<br/>
Wept one day and then a second,<br/>
Wept the third from morn till even.<br/>
Then I climbed a. lofty mountain,<br/>
There I called in wailing accents,<br/>
And the woodlands gave this answer,<br/>
Thus the distant hills re-echoed:<br/>
‘Call no longer, foolish virgin,<br/>
All thy calls and tears are useless;<br/>
There is none to give thee answer,<br/>
Far away, thy home and people.’<br/>
“On the third and on the fourth days,<br/>
On the fifth, and sixth, and seventh,<br/>
Constantly I sought to perish;<br/>
But in vain were all my efforts,<br/>
Could not die upon the mountains.<br/>
If this wretched maid had perished,<br/>
In the summer of the third year,<br/>
She had fed earth’s vegetation,<br/>
She had blossomed as a flower,<br/>
Knowing neither pain nor sorrow.”<br/>
Scarcely had the maiden spoken,<br/>
When she bounded from the snow-sledge,<br/>
Rushed upon the rolling river,<br/>
To the cataract’s commotion,<br/>
To the fiery stream and whirlpool.<br/>
Thus Kullervo’s lovely sister<br/>
Hastened to her own destruction,<br/>
To her death by fire and water,<br/>
Found her peace in Tuonela,<br/>
In the sacred stream of Mana.<br/>
Then the wicked Kullerwoinen<br/>
Fell to weeping, sorely troubled,<br/>
Wailed, and wept, and heavy-hearted,<br/>
Spake these words in bitter sorrow:<br/>
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!<br/>
I have slain my virgin-sister,<br/>
Shamed the daughter of my mother;<br/>
Woe to thee, my ancient father!<br/>
Woe to thee, my gray-haired mother!<br/>
Wherefore was I born and nurtured,<br/>
Why this hapless child’s existence?<br/>
Better fate to Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Had he never seen the daylight,<br/>
Or, if born, had never thriven<br/>
In these mournful days of evil!<br/>
Death has failed to do his duty,<br/>
Sickness sinned in passing by me,<br/>
Should have slain me in the cradle,<br/>
When the seventh day had ended!”<br/>
Thereupon he slips the collar<br/>
Of his prancing royal racer,<br/>
Mounts the silver-headed fleet-foot,<br/>
Gallops like the lightning homeward;<br/>
Gallops only for a moment,<br/>
When he halts his foaming courser<br/>
At the cabin of his father.<br/>
In the court-yard stood the mother,<br/>
Thus the wicked son addressed her:<br/>
“Faithful mother, fond and tender,<br/>
Hadst thou slain me when an infant,<br/>
Smoked my life out in the chamber,<br/>
In a winding-sheet hadst thrown me<br/>
To the cataract and whirlpool,<br/>
In the fire hadst set my cradle,<br/>
After seven nights had ended,<br/>
Worthy would have been thy service.<br/>
Had the village-maidens asked thee:<br/>
‘Where is now the little cradle,<br/>
Wherefore is the bath-room empty?’<br/>
This had been a worthy answer:<br/>
‘I have burned the wizard’s cradle,<br/>
Cast the infant to the fire-dogs;<br/>
In the bath-room corn is sprouting,<br/>
From the barley malt is brewing.’”<br/>
Thereupon the aged mother<br/>
Asks her wizard-son these questions:<br/>
“What has happened to my hero,<br/>
What new fate has overcome thee?<br/>
Comest thou as from Tuoni,<br/>
From the castles of Manala?”<br/>
This, Kullervo’s frank confession:<br/>
“Infamous the tale I bring thee,<br/>
My confession is dishonor:<br/>
On the way I met a maiden,<br/>
Met thy long-lost, wayward daughter,<br/>
Did not recognize my sister,<br/>
Fatal was the sin committed!<br/>
When the taxes had been settled,<br/>
When the tribute had been gathered,<br/>
Came a matchless maid to meet me,<br/>
Whom I witless led to sorrow,<br/>
This my mother’s long-lost daughter.<br/>
When she saw in me her brother,<br/>
Quick she bounded from the snow-sledge,<br/>
Hastened to the roaring waters,<br/>
To the cataract’s commotion,<br/>
To the fiery stream and whirlpool,<br/>
Hastened to her full destruction.<br/>
“Now, alas! must I determine,<br/>
Now must find a spot befitting,<br/>
Where thy sinful son may perish;<br/>
Tell me, all-forgiving mother,<br/>
Where to end my life of trouble;<br/>
Let me stop the black-wolf’s howling,<br/>
Let me satisfy the hunger<br/>
Of the vicious bear of Northland;<br/>
Let the shark or hungry sea-dog<br/>
Be my dwelling-place hereafter!”<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“Do not go to stop the howling<br/>
Of the hungry wolf of Northland;<br/>
Do not haste to still the black-bear<br/>
Growling in his forest-cavern;<br/>
Let not shark, nor vicious sea-dog<br/>
Be thy dwelling-place hereafter.<br/>
Spacious are the rooms of Suomi,<br/>
Limitless the Sawa-borders,<br/>
Large enough to hide transgression,<br/>
Man’s misdeeds to hide for ages,<br/>
With his sins and evil actions.<br/>
Six long years man’s sins lie hidden<br/>
In the border-land of Kalma,<br/>
Even nine for magic heroes,<br/>
Till the years bring consolation,<br/>
Till they quiet all his mourning.”<br/>
Kullerwoinen, wicked wizard,<br/>
Answers thus his grieving mother:<br/>
“I can never hide from sorrow,<br/>
Cannot flee from my misconduct;<br/>
To the jaws of death I hasten,<br/>
To the open courts of Kalma,<br/>
To the hunting-grounds of Pohya,<br/>
To the battle-fields of heroes.<br/>
Untamoinen still is living,<br/>
Unmolested roams the wicked,<br/>
Unavenged my father’s grievance,<br/>
Unavenged my mother’s tortures,<br/>
Unavenged the wrongs I suffer!”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap36"/>RUNE XXXVI.<br/>
KULLERWOINEN’S VICTORY AND DEATH.</h2>
<p>Kullerwionen, wicked wizard,<br/>
In his purple-colored stockings,<br/>
Now prepares himself for battle;<br/>
Grinds a long time on his broadsword,<br/>
Sharpens well his trusty weapon,<br/>
And his mother speaks as follows:<br/>
“Do not go, my son beloved,<br/>
Go not to the wars, my hero,<br/>
Struggle not with hostile spearsmen.<br/>
Whoso goes to war for nothing,<br/>
Undertakes a fearful combat,<br/>
Undertakes a fatal issue;<br/>
Those that war without a reason<br/>
Will be slaughtered for their folly,<br/>
Easy prey to bows and arrows.<br/>
Go thou with a goat to battle,<br/>
Shouldst thou go to fight the roebuck,<br/>
’Tis the goat that will be vanquished,<br/>
And the roebuck will be slaughtered;<br/>
With a frog thou’lt journey homeward,<br/>
Victor, with but little honor!”<br/>
These the words of Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Shall not journey through the marshes,<br/>
Shall not sink upon the heather,<br/>
On the home-land of the raven,<br/>
Where the eagles scream at day-break.<br/>
When I yield my life forever,<br/>
Bravely will I fall in battle,<br/>
Fall upon the field of glory,<br/>
Beautiful to die in armor,<br/>
And the clang and clash of armies,<br/>
Beautiful the strife for conquest!<br/>
Thus Kullervo soon will hasten<br/>
To the kingdom of Tuoni,<br/>
To the realm of the departed,<br/>
Undeformed by wasting sickness.”<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“If thou diest in the conflict,<br/>
Who will stay to guard thy father,<br/>
Who will give thy sire protection?”<br/>
These the words of Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Let him die upon the court-yard,<br/>
Sleeping out his life of sorrow!”<br/>
“Who then will protect thy mother,<br/>
Be her shield in times of danger?”<br/>
“Let her die within the stable,<br/>
Or the cabin where she lingers!”<br/>
“Who then will defend thy brother,<br/>
Give him aid in times of trouble?”<br/>
“Let him die within the forest,<br/>
Sleep his life away unheeded!”<br/>
“Who will comfort then thy sister,<br/>
Who will aid her in affliction?”<br/>
“Let her sink beneath the waters,<br/>
Perish in the crystal fountain,<br/>
Where the brook flows on in beauty,<br/>
Like a silver serpent winding<br/>
Through the valley to the ocean!”<br/>
Thereupon the wild Kullervo<br/>
Hastens from his home to battle,<br/>
To his father speaks, departing:<br/>
“Fare thou well, my aged father!<br/>
Wilt thou weep for me, thy hero,<br/>
When thou hearest I have perished,<br/>
Fallen from thy tribe forever,<br/>
Perished on the field of glory?”<br/>
Thus the father speaks in answer:<br/>
“I shall never mourn the downfall<br/>
Of my evil son, Kullervo;<br/>
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;<br/>
Shall beget a second hero<br/>
That will do me better service,<br/>
That will think and act in wisdom.”<br/>
Kullerwoinen gives this answer:<br/>
“Neither shall I mourn thy downfall,<br/>
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;<br/>
I shall make a second father,<br/>
Make the head from loam and sandstone,<br/>
Make the eyes from swamp-land berries,<br/>
Make the beard from withered sea-grass,<br/>
Make the feet from roots of willow,<br/>
Make the form from birch-wood fungus.”<br/>
Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,<br/>
To his brother speaks as follows:<br/>
“Fare thou well, beloved brother!<br/>
Wilt thou weep for me departed,<br/>
Shouldst thou hear that I have perished,<br/>
Fallen on the field of battle?”<br/>
This the answer of the brother:<br/>
“I shall never mourn the downfall<br/>
Of my brother, Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;<br/>
I shall find a second brother;<br/>
Find one worthier and wiser!”<br/>
This is Kullerwoinen’s answer:<br/>
“Neither shall I mourn thy downfall,<br/>
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;<br/>
I shall form a second brother,<br/>
Make the head from dust and ashes,<br/>
Make the eyes from pearls of ocean,<br/>
Make the beard from withered verdure,<br/>
Make the form from pulp of birch-wood.”<br/>
To his sister speaks Kullervo:<br/>
“Fare thou well, beloved sister!<br/>
Surely thou wilt mourn my downfall,<br/>
Weep for me when I have perished,<br/>
When thou hearest I have fallen<br/>
In the heat and din of battle,<br/>
Fallen from thy race forever!”<br/>
But the sister makes this answer:<br/>
“Never shall I mourn thy downfall,<br/>
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;<br/>
I shall seek a second brother,<br/>
Seek a brother, purer, better,<br/>
One that will not shame his sister!”<br/>
Kullerwoinen thus makes answer:<br/>
“Neither shall I mourn thee fallen,<br/>
Shall not weep when thou hast perished;<br/>
I shall form a second sister,<br/>
Make the head from whitened marble,<br/>
Make the eyes from golden moonbeams,<br/>
Make the tresses from the rainbow,<br/>
Make the ears from ocean-flowers,<br/>
And her form from gold and silver.<br/>
“Fare thou well, beloved mother,<br/>
Mother, beautiful and faithful!<br/>
Wilt thou weep when I have perished,<br/>
Fallen on the field of glory,<br/>
Fallen from thy race forever?”<br/>
Thus the mother speaks in answer:<br/>
“Canst not fathom love maternal,<br/>
Canst not smother her affection;<br/>
Bitterly I’ll mourn thy downfall,<br/>
I would weep if thou shouldst perish,<br/>
Shouldst thou leave my race forever;<br/>
I would weep in court or cabin,<br/>
Sprinkle all these fields with tear-drops,<br/>
Weep great rivers to the ocean,<br/>
Weep to melt the snows of Northland,<br/>
Make the hillocks green with weeping,<br/>
Weep at morning, weep at evening,<br/>
Weep three years in bitter sorrow<br/>
O’er the death of Kullerwoinen!”<br/>
Thereupon the wicked wizard<br/>
Went rejoicing to the combat;<br/>
In delight to war he hastened<br/>
O’er the fields, and fens, and fallows,<br/>
Shouting loudly on the heather,<br/>
Singing o’er the hills and mountains,<br/>
Rushing through the glens and forests,<br/>
Blowing war upon his bugle.<br/>
Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
When a messenger appearing,<br/>
Spake these words to Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Lo! thine aged sire has perished,<br/>
Fallen from thy race forever;<br/>
Hasten home and do him honor,<br/>
Lay him in the lap of Kalma.”<br/>
Kullerwoinen inade this answer:<br/>
“Has my aged father perished,<br/>
There is home a sable stallion<br/>
That will take him to his slumber,<br/>
Lay him in the lap of Kalma.”<br/>
Then Kullervo journeyed onward,<br/>
Calling war upon his bugle,<br/>
Till a messenger appearing,<br/>
Brought this word to Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Lo! thy brother too has perished,<br/>
Dead he lies within the forest,<br/>
Manalainen’s trumpet called him;<br/>
Home return and do him honor,<br/>
Lay him in the lap of Kalma.”<br/>
Kullerwoinen thus replying:<br/>
“Has my hero-brother perished,<br/>
There is home a sable stallion<br/>
That will take him to his slumber,<br/>
Lay him in the lap of Kalma.”<br/>
Young Kullervo journeyed onward<br/>
Over vale and over mountain,<br/>
Playing on his reed of battle,<br/>
Till a messenger appearing<br/>
Brought the warrior these tidings:<br/>
“Lo! thy sister too has perished,<br/>
Perished in the crystal fountain,<br/>
Where the waters flow in beauty,<br/>
Like a silver serpent winding<br/>
Through the valley to the ocean;<br/>
Home return and do her honor,<br/>
Lay her in the lap of Kalma.”<br/>
These the words of Kullerwoinen:<br/>
“Has my beauteous sister perished,<br/>
Fallen from my race forever,<br/>
There is home a sable filly<br/>
That will take her to her resting,<br/>
Lay her in the lap of Kalma.”<br/>
Still Kullervo journeyed onward,<br/>
Through the fens he went rejoicing,<br/>
Sounding war upon his bugle,<br/>
Till a messenger appearing<br/>
Brought to him these words of sorrow:<br/>
“Lo! thy mother too has perished,<br/>
Died in anguish, broken-hearted;<br/>
Home return and do her honor,<br/>
Lay her in the lap of Kalma.”<br/>
These the measures of Kullervo:<br/>
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated,<br/>
That my mother too has perished,<br/>
She that nursed me in my cradle,<br/>
Made my couch a golden cover,<br/>
Twirled for me the spool and spindle!<br/>
Lo! Kullervo was not present<br/>
When his mother’s life departed;<br/>
May have died upon the mountains,<br/>
Perished there from cold and hunger.<br/>
Lave the dead form of my mother<br/>
In the crystal waters flowing;<br/>
Wrap her in the robes of ermine,<br/>
Tie her hands with silken ribbon,<br/>
Take her to the grave of ages,<br/>
Lay her in the lap of Kalma.<br/>
Bury her with songs of mourning,<br/>
Let the singers chant my sorrow;<br/>
Cannot leave the fields of battle<br/>
While Untamo goes unpunished,<br/>
Fell destroyer of my people.”<br/>
Kullerwoinen journeyed onward,<br/>
Still rejoicing, to the combat,<br/>
Sang these songs in supplication:<br/>
“Ukko, mightiest of rulers,<br/>
Loan to me thy sword of battle,<br/>
Grant to me thy matchless weapon,<br/>
And against a thousand armies<br/>
I will war and ever conquer.”<br/>
Ukko, gave the youth his broadsword,<br/>
Gave his blade of magic powers<br/>
To the wizard, Kullerwoinen.<br/>
Thus equipped, the mighty hero<br/>
Slew the people of Untamo,<br/>
Burned their villages to ashes;<br/>
Only left the stones and ovens,<br/>
And the chimneys of their hamlets.<br/>
Then the conqueror, Kullervo,<br/>
Turned his footsteps to his home-land,<br/>
To the cabin of his father;<br/>
To his ancient fields and forests.<br/>
Empty did he find the cabin,<br/>
And the forests were deserted;<br/>
No one came to give him greeting,<br/>
None to give the hand of welcome;<br/>
Laid his fingers on the oven,<br/>
But he found it cold and lifeless;<br/>
Then he knew to satisfaction<br/>
That his mother lived no longer;<br/>
Laid his hand upon the fire-place,<br/>
Cold and lifeless were the hearth-stones;<br/>
Then he knew to satisfaction<br/>
That his sister too had perished;<br/>
Then he sought the landing-places,<br/>
Found no boats upon the rollers;<br/>
Then he knew to satisfaction<br/>
That his brother too had perished;<br/>
Then he looked upon the fish-nets,<br/>
And he found them torn and tangled;<br/>
And he knew to satisfaction<br/>
That his father too had perished.<br/>
Bitterly he wept and murmured,<br/>
Wept one day, and then a second,<br/>
On the third day spake as follows:<br/>
“Faithful mother, fond and tender,<br/>
Why hast left me here to sorrow<br/>
In this wilderness of trouble?<br/>
But thou dost not hear my calling,<br/>
Though I sing in magic accents,<br/>
Though my tear-drops speak lamenting,<br/>
Though my heart bemoans thine absence.<br/>
From her grave awakes the mother,<br/>
To Kullervo speaks these measures:<br/>
“Thou has still the dog remaining,<br/>
He will lead thee to the forest;<br/>
Follow thou the faithful watcher,<br/>
Let him lead thee to the woodlands,<br/>
To the farthest woodland border,<br/>
To the caverns of the wood-nymphs;<br/>
There the forest maidens linger,<br/>
They will give thee food and shelter,<br/>
Give my hero joyful greetings.”<br/>
Kullerwoinen, with his watch-dog,<br/>
Hastens onward through the forest,<br/>
Journeys on through fields and fallows;<br/>
Journeys but a little distance,<br/>
Till he comes upon the summit<br/>
Where he met his long-lost sister;<br/>
Finds the turf itself is weeping,<br/>
Finds the glen-wood filled with sorrow,<br/>
Finds the heather shedding tear-drops,<br/>
Weeping are the meadow-flowers,<br/>
O’er the ruin of his sister.<br/>
Kullerwoinen, wicked wizard,<br/>
Grasps the handle of his broadsword,<br/>
Asks the blade this simple question:<br/>
“Tell me, O my blade of honor,<br/>
Dost thou wish to drink my life-blood,<br/>
Drink the blood of Kullerwoinen?”<br/>
Thus his trusty sword makes answer,<br/>
Well divining his intentions:<br/>
Why should I not drink thy life-blood,<br/>
Blood of guilty Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Since I feast upon the worthy,<br/>
Drink the life-blood of the righteous?”<br/>
Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,<br/>
Wicked wizard of the Northland,<br/>
Lifts the mighty sword of Ukko,<br/>
Bids adieu to earth and heaven;<br/>
Firmly thrusts the hilt in heather,<br/>
To his heart he points the weapon,<br/>
Throws his weight upon his broadsword,<br/>
Pouring out his wicked life-blood,<br/>
Ere be journeys to Manala.<br/>
Thus the wizard finds destruction,<br/>
This the end of Kullerwoinen,<br/>
Born in sin, and nursed in folly.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
As he hears the joyful tidings,<br/>
Learns the death of fell Kullervo,<br/>
Speaks these words of ancient wisdom:<br/>
“O, ye many unborn nations,<br/>
Never evil nurse your children,<br/>
Never give them out to strangers,<br/>
Never trust them to the foolish!<br/>
If the child is not well nurtured,<br/>
Is not rocked and led uprightly,<br/>
Though he grow to years of manhood,<br/>
Bear a strong and shapely body,<br/>
He will never know discretion,<br/>
Never eat. the bread of honor,<br/>
Never drink the cup of wisdom.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap37"/>RUNE XXXVII.<br/>
ILMARINEN’S BRIDE OF GOLD.</h2>
<p>Ilmarinen, metal-worker,<br/>
Wept one day, and then a second,<br/>
Wept the third from morn till evening,<br/>
O’er the death of his companion,<br/>
Once the Maiden of the Rainbow;<br/>
Did not swing his heavy hammer,<br/>
Did not touch its copper handle,<br/>
Made no sound within his smithy,<br/>
Made no blow upon his anvil,<br/>
Till three months had circled over;<br/>
Then the blacksmith spake as follows:<br/>
“Woe is me, unhappy hero!<br/>
Do not know how I can prosper;<br/>
Long the days, and cold, and dreary,<br/>
Longer still the nights, and colder;<br/>
I am weary in the evening,<br/>
In the morning still am weary,<br/>
Have no longing for the morning,<br/>
And the evening is unwelcome;<br/>
Have no pleasure in the future,<br/>
All my pleasures gone forever,<br/>
With my faithful life-companion<br/>
Slaughtered by the hand of witchcraft!<br/>
Often will my heart-strings quiver<br/>
When I rest within my chamber,<br/>
When I wake at dreamy midnight,<br/>
Half-unconscious, vainly searching<br/>
For my noble wife departed.”<br/>
Wifeless lived the mourning blacksmith,<br/>
Altered in his form and features;<br/>
Wept one month and then another,<br/>
Wept three months in full succession.<br/>
Then the magic metal-worker<br/>
Gathered gold from deeps of ocean,<br/>
Gathered silver from the mountains,<br/>
Gathered many heaps of birch-wood.<br/>
Filled with faggots thirty sledges,<br/>
Burned the birch-wood into ashes,<br/>
Put the ashes in the furnace,<br/>
Laid the gold upon the embers,<br/>
Lengthwise laid a piece of silver<br/>
Of the size of lambs in autumn,<br/>
Or the fleet-foot hare in winter;<br/>
Places servants at the bellows,<br/>
Thus to melt the magic metals.<br/>
Eagerly the servants labor,<br/>
Gloveless, hatless, do the workmen<br/>
Fan the flames within the furnace.<br/>
Ilmarinen, magic blacksmith,<br/>
Works unceasing at his forging,<br/>
Thus to mould a golden image,<br/>
Mould a bride from gold and silver;<br/>
But the workmen fail their master,<br/>
Faithless stand they at the bellows.<br/>
Wow the artist, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Fans the flame with force of magic,<br/>
Blows one day, and then a second,<br/>
Blows the third from morn till even;<br/>
Then he looks within the furnace,<br/>
Looks around the oven-border,<br/>
Hoping there to see an image<br/>
Rising from the molten metals.<br/>
Comes a lambkin from the furnace,<br/>
Rising from the fire of magic,<br/>
Wearing hair of gold and copper,<br/>
Laced with many threads of silver;<br/>
All rejoice but Ilmarinen<br/>
At the beauty of the image.<br/>
This the language of the blacksmith:<br/>
“May the wolf admire thy graces;<br/>
I desire a bride of beauty<br/>
Born from molten gold and silver!”<br/>
Ilmarinen, the magician,<br/>
To the furnace threw the lambkin;<br/>
Added gold in great abundance,<br/>
And increased the mass of silver,<br/>
Added other magic metals,<br/>
Set the workmen at the bellows;<br/>
Zealously the servants labor,<br/>
Gloveless, hatless, do the workmen<br/>
Fan the flames within the furnace.<br/>
Ilmarinen, wizard-forgeman,<br/>
Works unceasing with his metals,<br/>
Moulding well a golden image,<br/>
Wife of molten gold and silver;<br/>
But the workmen fail their master,<br/>
Faithless do they ply the bellows.<br/>
Now the artist, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Fans the flames by force of magic;<br/>
Blows one day, and then a second,<br/>
Blows a third from morn till evening,<br/>
When he looks within the furnace,<br/>
Looks around the oven-border,<br/>
Hoping there, to see an image<br/>
Rising from the molten metals.<br/>
From the flames a colt arises,<br/>
Golden-maned and silver-headed,<br/>
Hoofs are formed of shining copper.<br/>
All rejoice but Ilmarinen<br/>
At the wonderful creation;<br/>
This the language of the blacksmith;<br/>
“Let the bears admire thy graces;<br/>
I desire a bride of beauty<br/>
Born of many magic metals.”<br/>
Thereupon the wonder-forger<br/>
Drives the colt back to the furnace,<br/>
Adds a greater mass of silver,<br/>
And of gold the rightful measure,<br/>
Sets the workmen at the bellows.<br/>
Eagerly the servants labor,<br/>
Gloveless, hatless, do the workmen<br/>
Fan the flames within the furnace.<br/>
Ilmarinen, the magician,<br/>
Works unceasing at his witchcraft,<br/>
Moulding well a golden maiden,<br/>
Bride of molten gold and silver;<br/>
But the workmen fail their master,<br/>
Faithlessly they ply the bellows.<br/>
Now the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Fans the flames with magic powers,<br/>
Blows one day, and then a second,<br/>
Blows a third from morn till even;<br/>
Then he looks within his furnace,<br/>
Looks around the oven-border,<br/>
Trusting there to see a maiden<br/>
Coming from the molten metals.<br/>
From the fire a virgin rises,<br/>
Golden-haired and silver-headed,<br/>
Beautiful in form and feature.<br/>
All are filled with awe and wonder,<br/>
But the artist and magician.<br/>
Ilmarinen, metal-worker,<br/>
Forges nights and days unceasing,<br/>
On the bride of his creation;<br/>
Feet he forges for the maiden,<br/>
Hands and arms, of gold and silver;<br/>
But her feet are not for walking,<br/>
Neither can her arms embrace him.<br/>
Ears he forges for the virgin,<br/>
But her ears are not for hearing;<br/>
Forges her a mouth of beauty,<br/>
Eyes he forges bright and sparkling;<br/>
But the magic mouth is speechless,<br/>
And the eyes are not for seeing.<br/>
Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“This, indeed, a priceless maiden,<br/>
Could she only speak in wisdom,<br/>
Could she breathe the breath of Ukko!”<br/>
Thereupon he lays the virgin<br/>
On his silken couch of slumber,<br/>
On his downy place of resting.<br/>
Ilmarinen heats his bath-room,<br/>
Makes it ready for his service,<br/>
Binds together silken brushes,<br/>
Brings three cans of crystal water,<br/>
Wherewithal to lave the image,<br/>
Lave the golden maid of beauty.<br/>
When this task had been completed,<br/>
Ilmarinen, hoping, trusting,<br/>
Laid his golden bride to slumber,<br/>
On his downy couch of resting;<br/>
Ordered many silken wrappings,<br/>
Ordered bear-skins, three in number,<br/>
Ordered seven lambs-wool blankets,<br/>
Thus to keep him warm in slumber,<br/>
Sleeping by the golden image<br/>
Re had forged from magic metals.<br/>
Warm the side of Ilmarinen<br/>
That was wrapped in furs and blankets;<br/>
Chill the parts beside the maiden,<br/>
By his bride of gold and silver;<br/>
One side warm, the other lifeless,<br/>
Turning into ice from coldness.<br/>
Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Not for me was born this virgin<br/>
From the magic molten metals;<br/>
I shall take her to Wainola,<br/>
Give her to old Wainamoinen,<br/>
As a bride and life-companion,<br/>
Comfort to him in his dotage.”<br/>
Ilmarinen, much disheartened,<br/>
Takes the virgin to Wainola,<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala,<br/>
To his brother speaks as follows:<br/>
“O, thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Look with favor on this image;<br/>
Make the maiden fair and lovely,<br/>
Beautiful in form and feature,<br/>
Suited to thy years declining!”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Looked in wonder on the virgin,<br/>
On the golden bride of beauty,<br/>
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Wherefore dost thou bring this maiden,<br/>
Wherefore bring to Wainamoinen<br/>
Bride of molten gold and silver?<br/>
Spake in answer Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Wherefore should I bring this image,<br/>
But for purposes the noblest?<br/>
I have brought her as companion<br/>
To thy life in years declining,<br/>
As a joy and consolation,<br/>
When thy days are full of trouble!”<br/>
Spake the good, old Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Magic brother, wonder-forger,<br/>
Throw the virgin to the furnace,<br/>
To the flames, thy golden image,<br/>
Forge from her a thousand trinkets.<br/>
Take the image into Ehstland,<br/>
Take her to the plains of Pohya,<br/>
That for her the mighty powers<br/>
May engage in deadly contest,<br/>
Worthy trophy for the victor;<br/>
Not for me this bride of wonder,<br/>
Neither for my worthy people.<br/>
I shall never wed an image<br/>
Born from many magic metals,<br/>
Never wed a silver maiden,<br/>
Never wed a golden virgin.”<br/>
Then the hero of the waters<br/>
Called together all his people,<br/>
Spake these words of ancient wisdom:<br/>
“Every child of Northland, listen,<br/>
Whether poor, or fortune-favored:<br/>
Never bow before an image<br/>
Born of molten gold and silver:<br/>
Never while the sunlight brightens,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers,<br/>
Choose a maiden of the metals,<br/>
Choose a bride from gold created<br/>
Cold the lips of golden maiden,<br/>
Silver breathes the breath of sorrow.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap38"/>RUNE XXXVIII.<br/>
ILMARINEN’S FRUITLESS WOOING.</h2>
<p>Ilmarinen, the magician,<br/>
The eternal metal-artist,<br/>
Lays aside the golden image,<br/>
Beauteous maid of magic metals;<br/>
Throws the harness on his courser,<br/>
Binds him to his sledge of birch-wood,<br/>
Seats himself upon the cross-bench,<br/>
Snaps the whip above the racer,<br/>
Thinking once again to journey<br/>
To the mansions of Pohyola,<br/>
There to woo a bride in honor,<br/>
Second daughter of the Northland.<br/>
On he journeyed, restless, northward,<br/>
Journeyed one day, then a second,<br/>
So the third from morn till evening,<br/>
When he reached a Northland-village<br/>
On the plains of Sariola.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Standing in the open court-yard,<br/>
Spied the hero, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Thus addressed the metal-worker:<br/>
“Tell me how my child is living,<br/>
How the Bride of Beauty prospers,<br/>
As a daughter to thy mother.”<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Head bent down and brow dejected,<br/>
Thus addressed the Northland hostess:<br/>
“O, thou dame of Sariola,<br/>
Do not ask me of thy daughter,<br/>
Since, alas I in Tuonela<br/>
Sleeps the Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Sleeps in death the Bride, of Beauty,<br/>
Underneath the fragrant heather,<br/>
In the kingdom of Manala.<br/>
Come I for a second daughter,<br/>
For the fairest of thy virgins.<br/>
Beauteous hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Give to me thy youngest maiden,<br/>
For my former wife’s compartments,<br/>
For the chambers of her sister.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Foolish was the Northland-hostess,<br/>
When she gave her fairest virgin,<br/>
In the bloom of youth and beauty<br/>
To the blacksmith of Wainola,<br/>
Only to be led to Mana,<br/>
Like a lambkin to the slaughter!<br/>
I shall never give my daughter,<br/>
Shall not give my youngest maiden<br/>
Bride of thine to be hereafter,<br/>
Life-companion at thy fireside.<br/>
Sooner would I give the fair one<br/>
To the cataract and whirlpool,<br/>
To the river of Manala,<br/>
To the waters of Tuoni!”<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Drew away his head, disdainful,<br/>
Shook his sable locks in anger,<br/>
Entered to the inner court-room,<br/>
Where the maiden sat in waiting,<br/>
Spake these measures to the daughter:<br/>
“Come with me, thou bright-eyed maiden,<br/>
To the cottage where thy sister<br/>
Lived and lingered in contentment,<br/>
Baked for me the toothsome biscuit,<br/>
Brewed for me the beer of barley,<br/>
Kept my dwelling-place in order.”<br/>
On the floor a babe was lying,<br/>
Thus he sang to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Uninvited, leave this mansion,<br/>
Go, thou stranger, from this dwelling;<br/>
Once before thou camest hither,<br/>
Only bringing pain and trouble,<br/>
Filling all our hearts with sorrow.<br/>
Fairest daughter of my mother,<br/>
Do not give this suitor welcome,<br/>
Look not on his eyes with pleasure,<br/>
Nor admire his form and features.<br/>
In his mouth are only wolf-teeth,<br/>
Cunning fox-claws in his mittens,<br/>
In his shoes art only bear-claws,<br/>
In his belt a hungry dagger;<br/>
Weapons these of blood and murder,<br/>
Only worn by the unworthy.”<br/>
Then the daughter spake as follows<br/>
To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Follow thee this maid will never,<br/>
Never heed unworthy suitors;<br/>
Thou hast slain the Bride of Beauty,<br/>
Once the Maiden of the Rainbow,<br/>
Thou wouldst also slay her sister.<br/>
I deserve a better suitor,<br/>
Wish a truer, nobler husband,<br/>
Wish to ride in richer sledges,<br/>
Have a better home-protection;<br/>
Never will I sweep the cottage<br/>
And the coal-place of a blacksmith.”<br/>
Then the hero, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The eternal metal-artist,<br/>
Turned his head away, disdainful,<br/>
Shook his sable locks in anger,<br/>
Quickly seized the trembling maiden,<br/>
Held her in his grasp of iron,<br/>
Hastened from the court of Louhi<br/>
To his sledge upon the highway.<br/>
In his sleigh he seats the virgin,<br/>
Snugly wraps her in his far-robes,<br/>
Snaps his whip above the racer,<br/>
Gallops on the high-road homeward;<br/>
With one hand the reins be tightens,<br/>
With the other holds the maiden.<br/>
Speaks the virgin-daughter, weeping:<br/>
We have reached the lowland-berries,<br/>
Here the herbs of water-borders;<br/>
Leave me here to sink and perish<br/>
As a child of cold misfortune.<br/>
Wicked Ilmarinen, listen!<br/>
If thou dost not quickly free me,<br/>
I will break thy sledge to pieces,<br/>
Throw thy fur-robes to the north-winds.”<br/>
Ilmarinen makes this answer:<br/>
“When the blacksmith builds his snow-sledge,<br/>
All the parts are hooped with iron;<br/>
Therefore will the beauteous maiden<br/>
Never beat my sledge to fragments.”<br/>
Then the silver-tinselled daughter<br/>
Wept and wailed in bitter accents,<br/>
Wrung her hands in desperation,<br/>
Spake again to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“If thou dost not quickly free me,<br/>
I shall change to ocean-salmon,<br/>
Be a whiting of the waters.”<br/>
“Thou wilt never thus escape me,<br/>
As a pike I’ll fleetly follow.”<br/>
Then the maiden of Pohyola<br/>
Wept and wailed in bitter accents,<br/>
Wrung her hands in desperation,<br/>
Spake again to Ilmarinen;<br/>
“If thou dost not quickly free me,<br/>
I shall hasten to the forest,<br/>
Mid the rocks become an ermine!”<br/>
“Thou wilt never thus escape me,<br/>
As a serpent I will follow.”<br/>
Then the beauty of the Northland,<br/>
Wailed and wept in bitter accents,<br/>
Wrung her hands in desperation,<br/>
Spake once more to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Surely, if thou dost not free me,<br/>
As a lark I’ll fly the ether,<br/>
Hide myself within the storm-clouds.”<br/>
“Neither wilt thou thus escape me,<br/>
As an eagle I will follow.”<br/>
They had gone but little distance,<br/>
When the courser shied and halted,<br/>
Frighted at some passing object;<br/>
And the maiden looked in wonder,<br/>
In the snow beheld some foot-prints,<br/>
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:<br/>
Who has run across our highway?”<br/>
“’Tis the timid hare”, he answered.<br/>
Thereupon the stolen maiden<br/>
Sobbed, and moaned, in deeps of sorrow,<br/>
Heavy-hearted, spake these measures:<br/>
“Woe is me, ill-fated virgin!<br/>
Happier far my life hereafter,<br/>
If the hare I could but follow<br/>
To his burrow in the woodlands!<br/>
Crook-leg’s fur to me is finer<br/>
Than the robes of Ilmarinen.”<br/>
Ilmarinen, the magician,<br/>
Tossed his head in full resentment,<br/>
Galloped on the highway homeward,<br/>
Travelled but a little distance,<br/>
When again his courser halted,<br/>
Frighted at some passing stranger.<br/>
Quick the maiden looked and wondered,<br/>
In the snow beheld some foot-prints,<br/>
Spake these measures to the blacksmith:<br/>
Who has crossed our snowy pathway?”<br/>
“’Tis a fox”, replied the minstrel.<br/>
Thereupon the beauteous virgin<br/>
Moaned again in depths of anguish,<br/>
Sang these accents, heavy-hearted:<br/>
“Woe is me, ill-fated maiden!<br/>
Happier far my life hereafter,<br/>
With the cunning fox to wander,<br/>
Than with this ill-mannered suitor;<br/>
Reynard’s fur to me is finer<br/>
Than the robes of Ilmarinen.”<br/>
Thereupon the metal-worker<br/>
Shut his lips in sore displeasure,<br/>
Hastened on the highway homeward;<br/>
Travelled but a little distance,<br/>
When again his courser halted.<br/>
Quick the maiden looked in wonder,<br/>
in the snow beheld some foot-prints,<br/>
Spake these words to the magician:<br/>
Who again has crossed our pathway?”<br/>
“’Tis the wolf”, said Ilmarinen.<br/>
Thereupon the fated daughter<br/>
Fell again to bitter weeping,<br/>
And Intoned these words of sorrow:<br/>
“Woe is me, a hapless maiden!<br/>
Happier far my life hereafter,<br/>
Brighter far would be my future,<br/>
If these tracks I could but follow;<br/>
On the wolf the hair is finer<br/>
Than the furs of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Faithless suitor of the Northland.”<br/>
Then the minstrel of Wainola<br/>
Closed his lips again in anger,<br/>
Shook his sable locks, resentful,<br/>
Snapped the whip above the racer,<br/>
And the steed flew onward swiftly,<br/>
O’er the way to Kalevala,<br/>
To the village of the blacksmith.<br/>
Sad and weary from his journey,<br/>
Ilmarinen, home-returning,<br/>
Fell upon his couch in slumber,<br/>
And the maiden laughed derision.<br/>
In the morning, slowly waking,<br/>
Head confused, and locks dishevelled,<br/>
Spake the wizard, words as follow:<br/>
“Shall I set myself to singing<br/>
Magic songs and incantations?<br/>
Shall I now enchant this maiden<br/>
To a black-wolf on the mountains,<br/>
To a salmon of the ocean?<br/>
Shall not send her to the woodlands,<br/>
All the forest would be frighted;<br/>
Shall not send her to the waters,<br/>
All the fish would flee in terror;<br/>
This my sword shall drink her life-blood,<br/>
End her reign of scorn and hatred.”<br/>
Quick the sword feels his intention,<br/>
Quick divines his evil purpose,<br/>
Speaks these words to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Was not born to drink the life-blood<br/>
Of a maiden pure and lovely,<br/>
Of a fair but helpless virgin.”<br/>
Thereupon the magic minstrel,<br/>
Filled with rage, began his singing;<br/>
Sang the very rocks asunder,<br/>
Till the distant hills re-echoed;<br/>
Sang the maiden to a sea-gull,<br/>
Croaking from the ocean-ledges,<br/>
Calling from the ocean-islands,<br/>
Screeching on the sandy sea-coast,<br/>
Flying to the winds opposing.<br/>
When his conjuring had ended,<br/>
Ilmarinen joined his snow-sledge,<br/>
Whipped his steed upon a gallop,<br/>
Hastened to his ancient smithy,<br/>
To his home in Kalevala.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Comes to meet him on the highway,<br/>
Speaks these words to the magician:<br/>
“Ilmarinen, worthy brother,<br/>
Wherefore comest heavy-hearted<br/>
From the dismal Sariola?<br/>
Does Pohyola live and prosper?<br/>
Spake the minstrel, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Why should not Pohyola prosper?<br/>
There the Sampo grinds unceasing,<br/>
Noisy rocks the lid in colors;<br/>
Grinds one day the flour for eating,<br/>
Grinds the second flour for selling,<br/>
Grinds the third day flour for keeping;<br/>
Thus it is Pohyola prospers.<br/>
While the Sampo is in Northland,<br/>
There is plowing, there is sowing,<br/>
There is growth of every virtue,<br/>
There is welfare never-ending.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Ilmarinen, artist-brother,<br/>
Where then is the Northland-daughter,<br/>
Far renowned and beauteous maiden,<br/>
For whose hand thou hast been absent?<br/>
These the words of Ilmarinen:<br/>
“I have changed the hateful virgin<br/>
To a sea-gull on the ocean;<br/>
Now she calls above the waters,<br/>
Screeches from the ocean-islands;<br/>
On the rocks she calls and murmurs<br/>
Vainly calling for a suitor.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap39"/>RUNE XXXIX.<br/>
WAINAMOINEN’S SAILING.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, old and faithful,<br/>
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“O thou wonder-working brother,<br/>
Let us go to Sariola,<br/>
There to gain the magic Sampo,<br/>
There to see the lid in colors.”<br/>
Ilmarinen gave this answer:<br/>
“Hard indeed to seize the Sampo,<br/>
Neither can the lid be captured<br/>
From the never-pleasant Northland,<br/>
From the dismal Sariola.<br/>
Louhi took away the Sampo,<br/>
Carried off the lid in colors<br/>
To the stone-mount of Pohyola;<br/>
Hid it in the copper mountain,<br/>
Where nine locks secure the treasure.<br/>
Many young roots sprout around it,<br/>
Grow nine fathoms deep in sand-earth,<br/>
One great root beneath the mountain,<br/>
In the cataract a second,<br/>
And a third beneath the castle<br/>
Built upon the mount of ages.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Brother mine, and wonder-worker,<br/>
Let us go to Sariola,<br/>
That we may secure the Sampo;<br/>
Let us build a goodly vessel,<br/>
Bring the Sampo to Wainola,<br/>
Bring away the lid in colors,<br/>
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,<br/>
From the copper-bearing mountain.<br/>
Where the miracle lies anchored.”<br/>
Ilmarinen thus made answer:<br/>
“By the land the way is safer,<br/>
Lempo travels on the ocean,<br/>
Ghastly Death upon his shoulder;<br/>
On the sea the waves will drift us,<br/>
And the storm-winds wreck our vessel;<br/>
Then our bands must do the rowing,<br/>
And our feet must steer us homeward.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Safe indeed by land to journey,<br/>
But the way is rough and trying,<br/>
Long the road and full of turnings;<br/>
Lovely is the ship on ocean,<br/>
Beautiful to ride the billows,<br/>
Journey easy o’er the waters,<br/>
Sailing in a trusty vessel;<br/>
Should the West-wind cross our pathway,<br/>
Will the South-wind drive us northward.<br/>
Be that as it may, my brother,<br/>
Since thou dost not love the water,<br/>
By the land then let us journey.<br/>
Forge me now the sword of battle,<br/>
Forge for me the mighty fire-sword,<br/>
That I may destroy the wild-beasts,<br/>
Frighten all the Northland people,<br/>
As we journey for the Sampo<br/>
To the cold and dismal village,<br/>
To the never-pleasant Northland,<br/>
To the dismal Sariola.”<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The eternal forger-artist,<br/>
Laid the metals in the furnace,<br/>
In the fire laid steel and iron,<br/>
In the hot-coals, gold and silver,<br/>
Rightful measure of the metals;<br/>
Set the workmen at the furnace,<br/>
Lustily they plied the bellows.<br/>
Like the wax the iron melted,<br/>
Like the dough the hard steel softened,<br/>
Like the water ran the silver,<br/>
And the liquid gold flowed after.<br/>
Then the minstrel, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The eternal wonder-forger,<br/>
Looks within his magic furnace,<br/>
On the border of his oven,<br/>
There beholds the fire-sword forming,<br/>
Sees the blade with golden handle;<br/>
Takes the weapon from the furnace,<br/>
Lays it on his heavy anvil<br/>
For the falling of the hammer;<br/>
Forges well the blade of magic,<br/>
Well the heavy sword be tempers,<br/>
Ornaments the hero-weapon<br/>
With the finest gold and silver.<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
Comes to view the blade of conquest,<br/>
Lifts admiringly the fire-sword,<br/>
Then these words the hero utters:<br/>
“Does the weapon match the soldier,<br/>
Does the handle suit the bearer?<br/>
Yea, the blade and hilt are molded<br/>
To the wishes of the minstrel.”<br/>
On the sword-point gleams the moonlight,<br/>
On the blade the sun is shining,<br/>
On the hilt the bright stars twinkle,<br/>
On the edge a horse is neighing,<br/>
On the handle plays a kitten,<br/>
On the sheath a dog is barking.<br/>
Wainamoinen wields his fire-sword,<br/>
Tests it on the iron-mountain,<br/>
And these words the hero utters:<br/>
“With this broadsword I could quickly<br/>
Cleave in twain the mount of Pohya,<br/>
Cut the flinty rocks asunder.”<br/>
Spake the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Wherewith shall I guard from danger,<br/>
How protect myself from evil,<br/>
From the ills by land and water?<br/>
Shall I wear an iron armor,<br/>
Belt of steel around my body?<br/>
Stronger is a man in armor,<br/>
Safer in a mail of copper.”<br/>
Now the time has come to journey<br/>
To the never-pleasant Northland;<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
And his brother, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Hasten to the field and forest,<br/>
Searching for their fiery coursers,<br/>
In each shining belt a bridle,<br/>
With a harness on their shoulders.<br/>
In the woods they find a race;<br/>
In the glen a steed of battle,<br/>
Ready for his master’s service.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
And the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Throw the harness on the courser,<br/>
Hitch him to the sledge of conquest,<br/>
Hasten on their journey Northward;<br/>
Drive along the broad-sea’s margin<br/>
Till they bear some one lamenting<br/>
On the strand hear something wailing<br/>
Near the landing-place of vessels.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Speaks these words in wonder, guessing,<br/>
“This must be some maiden weeping,<br/>
Some fair daughter thus lamenting;<br/>
Let us journey somewhat nearer,<br/>
To discover whence this wailing.”<br/>
Drew they nearer, nearer, nearer,<br/>
Hoping thus to find a maiden<br/>
Weeping on the sandy sea-shore.<br/>
It was not a maiden weeping,<br/>
But a vessel, sad, and lonely,<br/>
Waiting on the shore and wailing.<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Why art weeping, goodly vessel,<br/>
What the cause of thy lamenting?<br/>
Art thou mourning for thy row-locks,<br/>
Is thy rigging ill-adjusted?<br/>
Dost thou weep since thou art anchored<br/>
On the shore in times of trouble?”<br/>
Thus the war-ship spake in answer:<br/>
“To the waters would this vessel<br/>
Haste upon the well-tarred rollers,<br/>
As a happy maiden journeys<br/>
To the cottage of her husband.<br/>
I, alas! a goodly vessel,<br/>
Weep because I lie at anchor,<br/>
Weep and wail because no hero<br/>
Sets me free upon the waters,<br/>
Free to ride the rolling billows.<br/>
It was said when I was fashioned,<br/>
Often sung when I was building,<br/>
That this bark should be for battle,<br/>
Should become a mighty war-ship,<br/>
Carry in my hull great treasures,<br/>
Priceless goods across the ocean.<br/>
Never have I sailed to conquest,<br/>
Never have I carried booty;<br/>
Other vessels not as worthy<br/>
To the wars are ever sailing,<br/>
Sailing to the songs of battle.<br/>
Three times in the summer season<br/>
Come they home with treasures laden,<br/>
In their hulls bring gold and silver;<br/>
I, alas! a worthy vessel,<br/>
Many months have lain at anchor,<br/>
I, a war-ship well constructed,<br/>
Am decaying in the harbor,<br/>
Never having sailed to conquest;<br/>
Worms are gnawing at my vitals,<br/>
In my hull their dwelling-places,<br/>
And ill-omened birds of heaven<br/>
Build their nests within my rigging;<br/>
Frogs and lizards of the forest<br/>
Play about my oars and rudder;<br/>
Three times better for this vessel<br/>
Were he but a valley birch-tree,<br/>
Or an aspen on the heather,<br/>
With the squirrels in his branches,<br/>
And the dogs beneath them barking!”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and faithfull<br/>
Thus addressed the ship at anchor:<br/>
“Weep no more, thou goodly vessel,<br/>
Man-of-war, no longer murmur;<br/>
Thou shalt sail to Sariola,<br/>
Sing the war-songs of the Northland,<br/>
Sail with us to deadly combat.<br/>
Wert thou built by the Creator,<br/>
Thou canst sail the roughest waters,<br/>
Sidewise journey o’er the ocean;<br/>
Dost not need the hand to touch thee,<br/>
Dost not need the foot to turn thee,<br/>
Needing nothing to propel thee.”<br/>
Thus the weeping boat made answer:<br/>
“Cannot sail without assistance,<br/>
Neither can my brother-vessels<br/>
Sail unaided o’er the waters,<br/>
Sail across the waves undriven.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Should I lead thee to the broad-sea,<br/>
Wilt thou journey north unaided,<br/>
Sail without the help of rowers,<br/>
Sail without the aid of south-winds,<br/>
Sail without the b elm to guide thee?<br/>
Thus the wailing ship replying:<br/>
Cannot sail without assistance,<br/>
Neither can my brother-vessels<br/>
Sail without the aid of rowers,<br/>
Sail without the help of south-winds,<br/>
Nor without the helm to guide them.”<br/>
These the words of Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Wilt thou run with aid of oarsmen<br/>
When the south-winds give assistance,<br/>
Guided by a skillful pilot?”<br/>
This the answer of the war-ship:<br/>
“Quickly can I course these waters,<br/>
When my oars are manned by rowers,<br/>
When my sails are filled with south-winds,<br/>
All my goodly brother-vessels<br/>
Sail the ocean with assistance,<br/>
When the master holds the rudder.”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Left the racer on the sea-side,<br/>
Tied him to the sacred birch-tree,<br/>
Hung the harness on a willow,<br/>
Rolled the vessel to the waters,<br/>
Sang the ship upon the broad-sea,<br/>
Asked the boat this simple question:<br/>
“O thou vessel, well-appearing<br/>
From the mighty oak constructed,<br/>
Art thou strong to carry treasures<br/>
As in view thou art commanding?<br/>
Thus the goodly ship made answer:<br/>
“Strong am I to carry treasures,<br/>
In my hull a golden cargo;<br/>
I can bear a hundred oarsmen,<br/>
And of warriors a thousand.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
Then began his wondrous singing.<br/>
On one side the magic vessel,<br/>
Sang he youth with golden virtues,<br/>
Bearded youth with strength of heroes,<br/>
Sang them into mail of copper.<br/>
On the other side the vessel,<br/>
Sang he silver-tinselled maidens,<br/>
Girded them with belts of copper,<br/>
Golden rings upon their fingers.<br/>
Sings again the great magician,<br/>
Fills the magic ship with heroes,<br/>
Ancient heroes, brave and mighty;<br/>
Sings them into narrow limits,<br/>
Since the young men came before them.<br/>
At the helm himself be seated,<br/>
Near the last beam of the vessel,<br/>
Steered his goodly boat in joyance,<br/>
Thus addressed the willing war-ship:<br/>
“Glide upon the trackless waters,<br/>
Sail away, my ship of magic,<br/>
Sail across the waves before thee,<br/>
Speed thou like a dancing bubble,<br/>
Like a flower upon the billows!”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Set the young men to the rowing,<br/>
Let the maidens sit in waiting.<br/>
Eagerly the youthful heroes<br/>
Bend the oars and try the row-locks,<br/>
But the distance is not lessened.<br/>
Then the minstrel, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Set the maidens to the rowing,<br/>
Let the young men rest in waiting.<br/>
Eagerly the merry maidens<br/>
Bend the aspen-oars in rowing,<br/>
But the distance is not lessened.<br/>
Then the master, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Set the old men to the rowing,<br/>
Let the youth remain in waiting.<br/>
Lustily the aged heroes<br/>
Bend and try the oars of aspen,<br/>
But the distance is not lessened.<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Grasped the oars with master-magic,<br/>
And the boat leaped o’er the surges,<br/>
Swiftly sped across the billows;<br/>
Far and wide the oars resounded,<br/>
Quickly was the distance lessened.<br/>
With a rush and roar of waters<br/>
Ilmarinen sped his vessel,<br/>
Benches, ribs, and row-locks creaking,<br/>
Oars of aspen far resounding;<br/>
Flap the sails like wings of moor-cocks,<br/>
And the prow dips like a white-swan;<br/>
In the rear it croaks like ravens,<br/>
Loud the oars and rigging rattle.<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Sitting by the bending rudder,<br/>
Turns his magic vessel landward,<br/>
To a jutting promontory,<br/>
Where appears a Northland-village.<br/>
On the point stands Lemminkainen,<br/>
Kaukomieli, black magician,<br/>
Ahti, wizard of Wainola,<br/>
Wishing for the fish of Pohya,<br/>
Weeping for his fated dwelling,<br/>
For his perilous adventures,<br/>
Hard at work upon a vessel,<br/>
On the sail-yards of a fish-boat,<br/>
Near the hunger-point and island,<br/>
Near the village-home deserted.<br/>
Good the ears of the magician,<br/>
Good the wizard’s eyes for seeing;<br/>
Casts his vision to the South-east,<br/>
Turns his eyes upon the sunset,<br/>
Sees afar a wondrous rainbow,<br/>
Farther on, a cloudlet hanging;<br/>
But the bow was a deception,<br/>
And the cloudlet a delusion;<br/>
’Tis a vessel swiftly sailing,<br/>
’Tis a war-ship flying northward,<br/>
O’er the blue-back of the broad-sea,<br/>
On the far-extending waters,<br/>
At the helm the master standing,<br/>
At the oars a mighty hero.<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Do not know this wondrous vessel,<br/>
Not this well-constructed war-ship,<br/>
Coming from the distant Suomi,<br/>
Rowing for the hostile Pohya.”<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Called aloud in tones of thunder<br/>
O’er the waters to the vessel;<br/>
Made the distant hills re-echo<br/>
With the music of his calling:<br/>
“Whence this vessel on the waters,<br/>
Whose the war-ship sailing hither?”<br/>
Spake the master of the vessel<br/>
To the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Who art thou from fen or forest,<br/>
Senseless wizard from the woodlands,<br/>
That thou dost not know this vessel,<br/>
Magic war-ship of Wainola?<br/>
Dost not know him at the rudder,<br/>
Nor the hero at the row-locks?”<br/>
Spake the wizard, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Well I know the helm-director,<br/>
And I recognize the rower;<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
At the helm directs the vessel;<br/>
Ilmarinen does the rowing.<br/>
Whither is the vessel sailing,<br/>
Whither wandering, my heroes?<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“We are sailing to the Northland,<br/>
There to gain the magic Sampo,<br/>
There to get the lid in colors,<br/>
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,<br/>
From the copper-bearing mountain.”<br/>
Spake the evil Lemminkainen:<br/>
“O, thou good, old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Take me with thee to Pohyola,<br/>
Make me third of magic heroes,<br/>
Since thou goest for the Sampo,<br/>
Goest for the lid in colors;<br/>
I shall prove a valiant soldier,<br/>
When thy wisdom calls for fighting;<br/>
I am skilled in arts of warfare!”<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Gave assent to Ahti’s wishes;<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Hastened to Wainola’s war-ship,<br/>
Bringing floats of aspen-timber,<br/>
To the ships of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Thus the hero of the Northland<br/>
Speaks to reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“There is aspen on my vessel,<br/>
Aspen-floats in great abundance,<br/>
And the boat is heavy-laden.<br/>
Wherefore dost thou bring the aspen<br/>
To the vessel of Wainola?”<br/>
Lemminkainen gave this answer:<br/>
“Not through caution sinks a vessel,<br/>
Nor a hay-stack by its proppings;<br/>
Seas abound in hidden dangers,<br/>
Heavy storms arise and threaten<br/>
Fell destruction to the sailor<br/>
That would brave the angry billows.”<br/>
Spake the good, old Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Therefore is this warlike vessel<br/>
Built of trusty steel and copper,<br/>
Trimmed and bound in toughest iron,<br/>
That the winds may, not destroy it,<br/>
May not harm my ship of magic.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap40"/>RUNE XL.<br/>
BIRTH OF THE HARP.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Onward steered his goodly vessel,<br/>
From the isle of Lemminkainen,<br/>
From the borders of the village;<br/>
Steered his war-ship through the waters,<br/>
Sang it o’er the ocean-billows,<br/>
Joyful steered it to Pohyola.<br/>
On the banks were maidens standing,<br/>
And the daughters spake these measures:<br/>
“List the music on the waters!<br/>
What this wonderful rejoicing,<br/>
What this singing on the billows?<br/>
Far more beautiful this singing,<br/>
This rejoicing on the waters,<br/>
Than our ears have heard in Northland.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
Steered his wonder-vessel onward,<br/>
Steered one day along the sea-shore,<br/>
Steered the next through shallow waters,<br/>
Steered the third day through the rivers.<br/>
Then the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Suddenly some words remembered,<br/>
He had heard along the fire-stream<br/>
Near the cataract and whirlpool,<br/>
And these words the hero uttered:<br/>
“Cease, O cataract, thy roaring,<br/>
Cease, O waterfall, thy foaming!<br/>
Maidens of the foam and current,<br/>
Sitting on the rocks in water,<br/>
On the stone-blocks in the river,<br/>
Take the foam and white-capped billows<br/>
In your arms and still their anger,<br/>
That our ships may pass in safety!<br/>
Aged dame beneath the eddy,<br/>
Thou that livest in the sea-foam,<br/>
Swimming, rise above the waters,<br/>
Lift thy head above the whirlpool,<br/>
Gather well the foam and billows<br/>
In thine arms and still their fury,<br/>
That our ship may pass in safety!<br/>
Ye, O rocks beneath the current,<br/>
Underneath the angry waters,<br/>
Lower well your heads of danger,<br/>
Sink below our magic vessel,<br/>
That our ship may pass in safety!<br/>
“Should this prayer prove inefficient,<br/>
Kimmo, hero son of Kammo,<br/>
Bore an outlet with thine auger,<br/>
Cut a channel for this vessel<br/>
Through the rocks beneath the waters,<br/>
That our ship may pass in safety!<br/>
Should all this prove unavailing,<br/>
Hostess of the running water,<br/>
Change to moss these rocky ledges,<br/>
Change this vessel to an air-bag,<br/>
That between these rocks and billows<br/>
It may float, and pass in safety!<br/>
“Virgin of the sacred whirlpool,<br/>
Thou whose home is in the river,<br/>
Spin from flax of strongest fiber,<br/>
Spin a thread of crimson color,<br/>
Draw it gently through the water,<br/>
That the thread our ship may follow,<br/>
And our vessel pass in safety!<br/>
Goddess of the helm, thou daughter<br/>
Of the ocean-winds and sea-foam,<br/>
Take thy helm endowed with mercy,<br/>
Guide our vessel through these dangers,<br/>
Hasten through these floods enchanted,<br/>
Passing by the house of envy,<br/>
By the gates of the enchanters,<br/>
That our ship may pass in safety!<br/>
“Should this prayer prove inefficient,<br/>
Ukko, Ruler of creation,<br/>
Guide our vessel with thy fire-sword,<br/>
Guide it with thy blade of lightning,<br/>
Through the dangers of these rapids,<br/>
Through the cataract and whirlpool,<br/>
That our ship may pass in safety!”<br/>
Thereupon old Wainamoinen<br/>
Steered his boat through winds and waters,<br/>
Through the rocky chinks and channels,<br/>
Through the surges wildly tossing;<br/>
And the vessel passed in safety<br/>
Through the dangers of the current,<br/>
Through the sacred stream and whirlpool.<br/>
As it gains the open waters,<br/>
Gains at length the broad-lake’s bosom,<br/>
Suddenly its motion ceases,<br/>
On some object firmly anchored.<br/>
Thereupon young Ilmarinen,<br/>
With the aid of Lemminkainen,<br/>
Plunges in the lake the rudder,<br/>
Struggles with the aid of magic;<br/>
But he cannot move the vessel,<br/>
Cannot free it from its moorings.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Thus addresses his companion:<br/>
“O thou hero, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Stoop and look beneath this war-ship,<br/>
See on what this boat is anchored,<br/>
See on what our craft is banging,<br/>
In this broad expanse of water,<br/>
In the broad-lake’s deepest soundings,<br/>
If upon some rock or tree-snag,<br/>
Or upon some other hindrance.”<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Looked beneath the magic vessel,<br/>
Peering through the crystal waters,<br/>
Spake and these the words be uttered:<br/>
“Does not rest upon a sand-bar,<br/>
Nor upon a rock, nor tree-snag,<br/>
But upon the back and shoulders<br/>
Of the mighty pike of Northland,<br/>
On the fin-bones of the monster.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Spake these words to Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Many things we find in water,<br/>
Rocks, and trees, and fish, and sea-duck;<br/>
Are we on the pike’s broad shoulders,<br/>
On the fin-bones of the monster,<br/>
Pierce the waters with thy broadsword,<br/>
Cut the monster into pieces.”<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen,<br/>
Reckless wizard, filled with courage,<br/>
Pulls his broadsword from his girdle,<br/>
From its sheath, the bone-divider,<br/>
Strikes with might of magic hero,<br/>
Headlong falls into the water;<br/>
And the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Lifts the wizard from the river,<br/>
Speaks these words to dripping Ahti:<br/>
“Accidents will come to mortals,<br/>
Accidents will come to heroes,<br/>
By the hundreds, by the thousands,<br/>
Even to the gods above us!”<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Drew his broadsword from his girdle,<br/>
From its sheath his blade of honor,<br/>
Tried to slay the pike of Northland<br/>
With the weapon of his forging;<br/>
But he broke his sword in pieces,<br/>
Did not harm the water-monster.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Thus addresses his companions<br/>
“Poor apologies for heroes!<br/>
When occasion calls for victors,<br/>
When we need some great magician,<br/>
Need a hero filled with valor,<br/>
Then the arm that comes is feeble,<br/>
And the mind insane or witless,<br/>
Strength and reason gone to others!”<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Miracle of strength and wisdom,<br/>
Draws his fire-sword from his girdle,<br/>
Wields the mighty blade of magic,<br/>
Strikes the waters as the lightning,<br/>
Strikes the pike beneath the vessel,<br/>
And impales, the mighty monster;<br/>
Raises him above the surface,<br/>
In the air the pike he circles,<br/>
Cuts the monster into pieces;<br/>
To the water falls the pike-tail,<br/>
To the ship the head and body;<br/>
Easily the ship moves onward.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and faithful,<br/>
To the shore directs his vessel,<br/>
On the strand the boat he anchors,<br/>
Looks in every nook and corner<br/>
For the fragments of the monster;<br/>
Gathers well the parts together,<br/>
Speaks these words to those about him:<br/>
“Let the oldest of the heroes<br/>
Slice for me the pike of Northland,<br/>
Slice the fish to fitting morsels.”<br/>
Answered all the men and heroes,<br/>
And the maidens spake, assenting:<br/>
“Worthier the catcher’s fingers,<br/>
Wainamoinen’s hands are sacred!”<br/>
Thereupon the wise magician<br/>
Drew a fish-knife from his girdle,<br/>
Sliced the pike to fitting morsels,<br/>
Spake again to those about him:<br/>
“Let the youngest of the maidens<br/>
Cook for me the pike of Northland,<br/>
Set for me a goodly dinner!”<br/>
All the maidens quick responded,<br/>
All the virgins vied in cooking;<br/>
Neither could outdo the other,<br/>
Thus the pike was rendered toothsome.<br/>
Feasted all the old magicians,<br/>
Feasted all the younger heroes,<br/>
Feasted all the men and maidens;<br/>
On the rocks were left the fish-bones,<br/>
Only relics of their feasting.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Looked upon the pile of fragments,<br/>
On the fish-bones looked and pondered,<br/>
Spake these words in meditation:<br/>
“Wondrous things might be constructed<br/>
From the relies of this monster,<br/>
Were they in the blacksmith’s furnace,<br/>
In the hands of the magician,<br/>
In the hands of Ilmarinen.”<br/>
Spake the blacksmith of Wainola:<br/>
“Nothing fine can be constructed<br/>
From the bones and teeth of fishes<br/>
By the skillful forger-artist,<br/>
By the hands of the magician.”<br/>
These the words of Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Something wondrous might be builded<br/>
From these jaws, and teeth, and fish-bones;<br/>
Might a magic harp be fashioned,<br/>
Could an artist be discovered<br/>
That could shape them to my wishes.”<br/>
But he found no fish-bone artist<br/>
That could shape the harp of joyance<br/>
From the relies of their feasting,<br/>
From the jaw-bones of the monster,<br/>
To the will of the magician.<br/>
Thereupon wise Wainamoinen<br/>
Set himself at work designing;<br/>
Quick became a fish-bone artist,<br/>
Made a harp of wondrous beauty,<br/>
Lasting joy and pride of Suomi.<br/>
Whence the harp’s enchanting arches?<br/>
From the jaw-bones of the monster.<br/>
Whence the necessary harp-pins?<br/>
From the pike-teeth firmly fastened.<br/>
Whence the sweetly singing harp-strings?<br/>
From the tail of Lempo’s stallion.<br/>
Thus was born the harp of magic<br/>
From the mighty pike of Northland,<br/>
From the relies from the feasting<br/>
Of the heroes of Wainola.<br/>
All the young men came to view it,<br/>
All the aged with their children,<br/>
Mothers with their beauteous daughters,<br/>
Maidens with their golden tresses;<br/>
All the people on the islands<br/>
Came to view the harp of joyance,<br/>
Pride and beauty of the Northland.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Let the aged try the harp-strings,<br/>
Gave it to the young magicians,<br/>
To the dames and to their daughters,<br/>
To the maidens, silver-tinselled,<br/>
To the singers of Wainola.<br/>
When the young men touched the harp-strings,<br/>
Then arose the notes of discord;<br/>
When the aged played upon it,<br/>
Dissonance their only music.<br/>
Spake the wizard, Lemminkainen:<br/>
“O ye witless, worthless children,<br/>
O ye senseless, useless maidens,<br/>
O ye wisdom-lacking heroes,<br/>
Cannot play this harp of magic,<br/>
Cannot touch the notes of concord!<br/>
Give to me this thing or beauty,<br/>
Hither bring the harp of fish-bones,<br/>
Let me try my skillful fingers.”<br/>
Lemminkainen touched the harp-strings,<br/>
Carefully the strings adjusted,<br/>
Turned the harp in all directions,<br/>
Fingered all the strings in sequence,<br/>
Played the instrument of wonder,<br/>
But it did not speak in concord,<br/>
Did not sing the notes of joyance.<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“There is none among these maidens,<br/>
None among these youthful heroes,<br/>
None among the old magicians<br/>
That can play the harp of magic,<br/>
Touch the notes of joy and pleasure.<br/>
Let us take the harp to Pohya,<br/>
There to find a skillful player<br/>
That can touch the strings in concord.”<br/>
Then they sailed to Sariola,<br/>
To Pohyola took the wonder,<br/>
There to find the harp a master.<br/>
All the heroes of Pohyola,<br/>
All the boys and all the maidens,<br/>
Ancient dames, and bearded minstrels,<br/>
Vainly touched the harp of beauty.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Took the harp-strings in her fingers;<br/>
All the youth of Sariola,<br/>
Youth of every tribe and station,<br/>
Vainly touched the harp of fish-bone;<br/>
Could not find the notes of joyance,<br/>
Dissonance their only pleasure;<br/>
Shrieked the harp-strings like the whirlwinds,<br/>
All the tones wore harsh and frightful.<br/>
In a corner slept a blind man,<br/>
Lay a gray-beard on the oven,<br/>
Rousing from his couch of slumber,<br/>
Murmured thus within his corner:<br/>
“Cease at once this wretched playing,<br/>
Make an end of all this discord;<br/>
It benumbs mine ears for hearing,<br/>
Racks my brain, despoils my senses,<br/>
Robs me of the sweets of sleeping.<br/>
If the harp of Suomi’s people<br/>
True delight cannot engender,<br/>
Cannot bring the notes of pleasure,<br/>
Cannot sing to sleep the aged,<br/>
Cast the thing upon the waters,<br/>
Sink it in the deeps of ocean,<br/>
Take it back to Kalevala,<br/>
To the home of him that made it,<br/>
To the bands of its creator.”<br/>
Thereupon the harp made answer,<br/>
To the blind man sang these measures:<br/>
“Shall not fall upon the waters,<br/>
Shall not sink within the ocean;<br/>
I will play for my creator,<br/>
Sing in melody and concord<br/>
In the fingers of my master.”<br/>
Carefully the harp was carried<br/>
To the artist that had made it<br/>
To the hands of its creator,<br/>
To the feet of Wainamoinen.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap41"/>RUNE XLI.<br/>
WAINAMOINEN’S HARP-SONGS.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
The eternal wisdom-singer,<br/>
Laves his hands to snowy whiteness,<br/>
Sits upon the rock of joyance,<br/>
On the stone of song be settles,<br/>
On the mount of silver clearness,<br/>
On the summit, golden colored;<br/>
Takes the harp by him created,<br/>
In his hands the harp of fish-bone,<br/>
With his knee the arch supporting,<br/>
Takes the harp-strings in his fingers,<br/>
Speaks these words to those assembled:<br/>
“Hither come, ye Northland people,<br/>
Come and listen to my playing,<br/>
To the harp’s entrancing measures,<br/>
To my songs of joy and gladness.”<br/>
Then the singer of Wainola<br/>
Took the harp of his creation,<br/>
Quick adjusting, sweetly tuning,<br/>
Deftly plied his skillful fingers<br/>
To the strings that he had fashioned.<br/>
Now was gladness rolled on gladness,<br/>
And the harmony of pleasure<br/>
Echoed from the hills and mountains:<br/>
Added singing to his playing,<br/>
Out of joy did joy come welling,<br/>
Now resounded marvelous music,<br/>
All of Northland stopped and listened.<br/>
Every creature in the forest,<br/>
All the beasts that haunt the woodlands,<br/>
On their nimble feet came bounding,<br/>
Came to listen to his playing,<br/>
Came to hear his songs of joyance.<br/>
Leaped the squirrels from the branches,<br/>
Merrily from birch to aspen;<br/>
Climbed the ermines on the fences,<br/>
O’er the plains the elk-deer bounded,<br/>
And the lynxes purred with pleasure;<br/>
Wolves awoke in far-off swamp-lands,<br/>
Bounded o’er the marsh and heather,<br/>
And the bear his den deserted,<br/>
Left his lair within the pine-wood,<br/>
Settled by a fence to listen,<br/>
Leaned against the listening gate-posts,<br/>
But the gate-posts yield beneath him;<br/>
Now he climbs the fir-tree branches<br/>
That he may enjoy and wonder,<br/>
Climbs and listens to the music<br/>
Of the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Tapiola’s wisest senior,<br/>
Metsola’s most noble landlord,<br/>
And of Tapio, the people,<br/>
Young and aged, men and maidens,<br/>
Flew like red-deer up the mountains<br/>
There to listen to the playing,<br/>
To the harp, of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Tapiola’s wisest mistress,<br/>
Hostess of the glen and forest,<br/>
Robed herself in blue and scarlet,<br/>
Bound her limbs with silken ribbons,<br/>
Sat upon the woodland summit,<br/>
On the branches of a birch-tree,<br/>
There to listen to the playing,<br/>
To the high-born hero’s harping,<br/>
To the songs of Wainamoinen.<br/>
All the birds that fly in mid-air<br/>
Fell like snow-flakes from the heavens,<br/>
Flew to hear the minstrel’s playing,<br/>
Hear the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Eagles in their lofty eyrie<br/>
Heard the songs of the enchanter;<br/>
Swift they left their unfledged young ones,<br/>
Flew and perched around the minstrel.<br/>
From the heights the hawks descended,<br/>
From the clouds down swooped the falcon,<br/>
Ducks arose from inland waters,<br/>
Swans came gliding from the marshes;<br/>
Tiny finches, green and golden,<br/>
Flew in flocks that darkened sunlight,<br/>
Came in myriads to listen;<br/>
Perched upon the head and shoulders<br/>
Of the charming Wainamoinen,<br/>
Sweetly singing to the playing<br/>
Of the ancient bard and minstrel.<br/>
And the daughters of the welkin,<br/>
Nature’s well-beloved daughters,<br/>
Listened all in rapt attention;<br/>
Some were seated on the rainbow,<br/>
Some upon the crimson cloudlets,<br/>
Some upon the dome of heaven.<br/>
In their hands the Moon’s fair daughters<br/>
Held their weaving-combs of silver;<br/>
In their hands the Sun’s sweet maidens<br/>
Grasped the handles of their distaffs,<br/>
Weaving with their golden shuttles,<br/>
Spinning from their silver spindles,<br/>
On the red rims of the cloudlets,<br/>
On the bow of many colors.<br/>
As they hear the minstrel playing,<br/>
Hear the harp of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Quick they drop their combs of silver,<br/>
Drop the spindles from their fingers,<br/>
And the golden threads are broken,<br/>
Broken are the threads of silver.<br/>
All the fish in Suomi-waters<br/>
Heard the songs of the magician,<br/>
Came on flying fins to listen<br/>
To the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Came the trout with graceful motions,<br/>
Water-dogs with awkward movements,<br/>
From the water-cliffs the salmon,<br/>
From the sea-caves came the whiting,<br/>
From the deeper caves the bill-fish;<br/>
Came the pike from beds of sea-fern,<br/>
Little fish with eyes of scarlet,<br/>
Leaning on the reeds and rushes,<br/>
With their heads above the surface;<br/>
Came to bear the harp of joyance,<br/>
Hear the songs of the enchanter.<br/>
Ahto, king of all the waters,<br/>
Ancient king with beard of sea-grass,<br/>
Raised his head above the billows,<br/>
In a boat of water-lilies,<br/>
Glided to the coast in silence,<br/>
Listened to the wondrous singing,<br/>
To the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
These the words the sea-king uttered:<br/>
“Never have I heard such playing,<br/>
Never heard such strains of music,<br/>
Never since the sea was fashioned,<br/>
As the songs of this enchanter,<br/>
This sweet singer, Wainamoinen.”<br/>
Satko’s daughters from the blue-deep,<br/>
Sisters of the wave-washed ledges,<br/>
On the colored strands were sitting,<br/>
Smoothing out their sea-green tresses<br/>
With the combs of molten silver,<br/>
With their silver-handled brushes,<br/>
Brushes forged with golden bristles.<br/>
When they hear the magic playing,<br/>
Hear the harp of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Fall their brushes on the billows,<br/>
Fall their combs with silver handles<br/>
To the bottom of the waters,<br/>
Unadorned their heads remaining,<br/>
And uncombed their sea-green tresses.<br/>
Came the hostess of the waters,<br/>
Ancient hostess robed in flowers,<br/>
Rising from her deep sea-castle,<br/>
Swimming to the shore in wonder,<br/>
Listened to the minstrel’s playing,<br/>
To the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
As the magic tones re-echoed,<br/>
As the singer’s song out-circled,<br/>
Sank the hostess into slumber,<br/>
On the rocks of many colors,<br/>
On her watery couch of joyance,<br/>
Deep the sleep that settled o’er her.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Played one day and then a second,<br/>
Played the third from morn till even.<br/>
There was neither man nor hero,<br/>
Neither ancient dame, nor maiden,<br/>
Not in Metsola a daughter,<br/>
Whom he did not touch to weeping;<br/>
Wept the young, and wept the aged,<br/>
Wept the mothers, wept the daughters<br/>
Wept the warriors and heroes<br/>
At the music of his playing,<br/>
At the songs of the magician.<br/>
Wainamoinen’s tears came flowing,<br/>
Welling from the master’s eyelids,<br/>
Pearly tear-drops coursing downward,<br/>
Larger than the whortle-berries,<br/>
Finer than the pearls of ocean,<br/>
Smoother than the eggs of moor-hens,<br/>
Brighter than the eyes of swallows.<br/>
From his eves the tear-drops started,<br/>
Flowed adown his furrowed visage,<br/>
Falling from his beard in streamlets,<br/>
Trickled on his heaving bosom,<br/>
Streaming o’er his golden girdle,<br/>
Coursing to his garment’s border,<br/>
Then beneath his shoes of ermine,<br/>
Flowing on, and flowing ever,<br/>
Part to earth for her possession,<br/>
Part to water for her portion.<br/>
As the tear-drops fall and mingle,<br/>
Form they streamlets from the eyelids<br/>
Of the minstrel, Wainamoinen,<br/>
To the blue-mere’s sandy margin,<br/>
To the deeps of crystal waters,<br/>
Lost among the reeds and rushes.<br/>
Spake at last the ancient minstrel:<br/>
“Is there one in all this concourse,<br/>
One in all this vast assembly<br/>
That can gather up my tear-drops<br/>
From the deep, pellucid waters?”<br/>
Thus the younger heroes answered,<br/>
Answered thus the bearded seniors:<br/>
“There is none in all this concourse,<br/>
None in all this vast assembly,<br/>
That can gather up thy tear-drops<br/>
From the deep, pellucid waters.”<br/>
Spake again wise Wainamoinen:<br/>
“He that gathers up my tear-drops<br/>
From the deeps of crystal waters<br/>
Shall receive a beauteous plumage.”<br/>
Came a raven, flying, croaking,<br/>
And the minstrel thus addressed him:<br/>
“Bring, O raven, bring my tear-drops<br/>
From the crystal lake’s abysses;<br/>
I will give thee beauteous plumage,<br/>
Recompense for golden service.”<br/>
But the raven failed his master.<br/>
Came a duck upon the waters,<br/>
And the hero thus addressed him:<br/>
“Bring O water-bird, my tear-drops;<br/>
Often thou dost dive the deep-sea,<br/>
Sink thy bill upon the bottom<br/>
Of the waters thou dost travel;<br/>
Dive again my tears to gather,<br/>
I will give thee beauteous plumage,<br/>
Recompense for golden service.”<br/>
Thereupon the duck departed,<br/>
Hither, thither, swam, and circled,<br/>
Dived beneath the foam and billow,<br/>
Gathered Wainamoinen’s tear-drops<br/>
From the blue-sea’s pebbly bottom,<br/>
From the deep, pellucid waters;<br/>
Brought them to the great magician,<br/>
Beautifully formed and colored,<br/>
Glistening in the silver sunshine,<br/>
Glimmering in the golden moonlight,<br/>
Many-colored as the rainbow,<br/>
Fitting ornaments for heroes,<br/>
Jewels for the maids of beauty.<br/>
This the origin of sea-pearls,<br/>
And the blue-duck’s beauteous plumage.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap42"/>RUNE XLII.<br/>
CAPTURE OF THE SAMPO.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
With the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
With the reckless son of Lempo,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
On the sea’s smooth plain departed,<br/>
On the far-extending waters,<br/>
To the village, cold and dreary,<br/>
To the never-pleasant Northland,<br/>
Where the heroes fall and perish.<br/>
Ilmarinen led the rowers<br/>
On one side the magic war-ship,<br/>
And the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
Led the rowers on the other.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Laid his hand upon the rudder,<br/>
Steered his vessel o’er the waters,<br/>
Through the foam and angry billows<br/>
To Pohyola’s place of landing,<br/>
To the cylinders of copper,<br/>
Where the war-ships lie at anchor.<br/>
When they had arrived at Pohya,<br/>
When their journey they had ended,<br/>
On the land they rolled their vessel,<br/>
On the copper-banded rollers,<br/>
Straightway journeyed to the village,<br/>
Hastened to the halls and hamlets<br/>
Of the dismal Sariola.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Thus addressed the stranger-heroes:<br/>
Magic heroes of Wainola,<br/>
What the tidings ye are bringing<br/>
To the people of my village?”<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel.<br/>
Gave this answer to the hostess:<br/>
“All the hosts of Kalevala<br/>
Are inquiring for the Sampo,<br/>
Asking for the lid in colors;<br/>
Hither have these heroes journeyed<br/>
To divide the priceless treasure.<br/>
Thus the hostess spake in answer:<br/>
“No one would divide a partridge,<br/>
Nor a squirrel, with three heroes;<br/>
Wonderful the magic Sampo,<br/>
Plenty does it bring to Northland;<br/>
And the colored lid re-echoes<br/>
From the copper-bearing mountains,<br/>
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,<br/>
To the joy of its possessors.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Thus addressed the ancient Louhi:<br/>
“If thou wilt not share the Sampo,<br/>
Give to us an equal portion,<br/>
We will take it to Wainola,<br/>
With its lid of many colors,<br/>
Take by force the hope of Pohya.”<br/>
Thereupon the Northland hostess<br/>
Angry grew and sighed for vengeance;<br/>
Called her people into council,<br/>
Called the hosts of Sariola,<br/>
Heroes with their trusted broadswords,<br/>
To destroy old Wainamoinen<br/>
With his people of the Northland.<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,<br/>
Hastened to his harp of fish-bone,<br/>
And began his magic playing;<br/>
All of Pohya stopped and listened,<br/>
Every warrior was silenced<br/>
By the notes of the magician;<br/>
Peaceful-minded grew the soldiers,<br/>
All the maidens danced with pleasure,<br/>
While the heroes fell to weeping,<br/>
And the young men looked in wonder.<br/>
Wainamoinen plays unceasing,<br/>
Plays the maidens into slumber,<br/>
Plays to sleep the young and aged,<br/>
All of Northland sleeps and listens.<br/>
Wise and wondrous Wainamoinen,<br/>
The eternal bard and singer,<br/>
Searches in his pouch of leather,<br/>
Draws therefrom his slumber-arrows,<br/>
Locks the eyelids of the sleepers,<br/>
Of the heroes of Pohyola,<br/>
Sings and charms to deeper slumber<br/>
All the warriors of the Northland.<br/>
Then the heroes of Wainola<br/>
Hasten to obtain the Sampo,<br/>
To procure the lid in colors<br/>
From the copper-bearing mountains.<br/>
From behind nine locks of copper,<br/>
In the stone-berg of Pohyola.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Then began his wondrous singing,<br/>
Sang in gentle tones of magic,<br/>
At the entrance to the mountain,<br/>
At the border of the stronghold;<br/>
Trembled all the rocky portals,<br/>
And the iron-banded pillars<br/>
Fell and crumbled at his singing.<br/>
Ilmarinen, magic blacksmith,<br/>
Well anointed all the hinges,<br/>
All the bars and locks anointed,<br/>
And the bolts flew back by magic,<br/>
All the gates unlocked in silence,<br/>
Opened for the great magician.<br/>
Spake the minstrel Wainamoinen:<br/>
“O thou daring Lemminkainen,<br/>
Friend of mine in times of trouble,<br/>
Enter thou within the mountain,<br/>
Bring away the wondrous Sampo,<br/>
Bring away the lid in colors!”<br/>
Quick the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Ever ready for a venture,<br/>
Hastens to the mountain-caverns,<br/>
There to find the famous Sampo,<br/>
There to get the lid in colors;<br/>
Strides along with conscious footsteps,<br/>
Thus himself he vainly praises:<br/>
“Great am I and full of glory,<br/>
Wonder-hero, son of Ukko,<br/>
I will bring away the Sampo,<br/>
Turn about the lid in colors,<br/>
Turn it on its magic hinges!”<br/>
Lemminkainen finds the wonder,<br/>
Finds the Sampo in the mountain,<br/>
Labors long with strength heroic,<br/>
Tugs with might and main to turn it;<br/>
Motionless remains the treasure,<br/>
Deeper sinks the lid in colors,<br/>
For the roots have grown about it,<br/>
Grown nine fathoms deep in sand-earth.<br/>
Lived a mighty ox in Northland,<br/>
Powerful in bone and sinew,<br/>
Beautiful in form and color,<br/>
Horns the length of seven fathoms,<br/>
Mouth and eyes of wondrous beauty.<br/>
Lemminkainen, reckless hero,<br/>
Harnesses the ox in pasture,<br/>
Takes the master-plow of Pohya,<br/>
Plows the roots about the Sampo,<br/>
Plows around the lid in colors,<br/>
And the sacred Sampo loosens,<br/>
Falls the colored lid in silence.<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Brings the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Brings the daring Lemminkainen,<br/>
Lastly brings the magic Sampo,<br/>
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,<br/>
From the copper-bearing mountain,<br/>
Hides it in his waiting vessel,<br/>
In the war-ship of Wainola.<br/>
Wainamoinen called his people,<br/>
Called his crew of men and maidens,<br/>
Called together all his heroes,<br/>
Rolled his vessel to the water,<br/>
Into billowy deeps and dangers.<br/>
Spake the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Whither shall we take the Sampo,<br/>
Whither take the lid in colors,<br/>
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,<br/>
From this evil spot of Northland?”<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and faithful,<br/>
Gave this answer to the question:<br/>
“Thither shall we take the Sampo,<br/>
Thither take the lid in colors,<br/>
To the fog-point on the waters,<br/>
To the island forest-covered;<br/>
There the treasure may be hidden,<br/>
May remain in peace for ages,<br/>
Free from trouble, free from danger,<br/>
Where the sword will not molest it.”<br/>
Then the minstrel, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Joyful, left the Pohya borders,<br/>
Homeward sailed, and happy-hearted,<br/>
Spake these measures on departing:<br/>
“Turn, O man-of-war, from Pohya,<br/>
Turn thy back upon the strangers,<br/>
Turn thou to my distant country!<br/>
Rock, O winds, my magic vessel,<br/>
Homeward drive my ship, O billows,<br/>
Lend the rowers your assistance,<br/>
Give the oarsmen easy labor,<br/>
On this vast expanse of waters!<br/>
Give me of thine oars, O Ahto,<br/>
Lend thine aid, O King of sea-waves,<br/>
Guide as with thy helm in safety,<br/>
Lay thy hand upon the rudder,<br/>
And direct our war-ship homeward;<br/>
Let the hooks of metal rattle<br/>
O’er the surging of the billows,<br/>
On the white-capped waves’ commotion.”<br/>
Then the master, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Guided home his willing vessel;<br/>
And the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
With the lively Lemminkainen,<br/>
Led the mighty host of rowers,<br/>
And the war-ship glided homeward<br/>
O’er the sea’s unruffled surface,<br/>
O’er the mighty waste of waters.<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Once before I rode these billows,<br/>
There were viands for the heroes,<br/>
There was singing for the maidens;<br/>
But to-day I hear no singing,<br/>
Hear no songs upon the vessel,<br/>
Hear no music on the waters.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,<br/>
Answered thus wild Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Let none sing upon the blue-sea,<br/>
On the waters, no rejoicing;<br/>
Singing would prolong our journey,<br/>
Songs disturb the host of rowers;<br/>
Soon will die the silver sunlight,<br/>
Darkness soon will overtake us,<br/>
On this evil waste of waters,<br/>
On this blue-sea, smooth and level.”<br/>
These the words of Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Time will fly on equal pinions<br/>
Whether we have songs or silence;<br/>
Soon will disappear the daylight,<br/>
And the night as quickly follow,<br/>
Whether we be sad or joyous.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
O’er the blue backs of the billows,<br/>
Steered one day, and then a second,<br/>
Steered the third from morn till even,<br/>
When the wizard, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Once again addressed the master:<br/>
“Why wilt thou, O famous minstrel,<br/>
Sing no longer for thy people,<br/>
Since the Sampo thou hast captured,<br/>
Captured too the lid in colors?”<br/>
These the words of Wainamoinen:<br/>
“’Tis not well to sing too early!<br/>
Time enough for songs of joyance<br/>
When we see our home-land mansions,<br/>
When our journeyings have ended!”<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:<br/>
“At the helm, if I were sitting,<br/>
I would sing at morn and evening,<br/>
Though my voice has little sweetness;<br/>
Since thy songs are not forthcoming<br/>
Listen to my wondrous singing!”<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Raised his voice above the waters,<br/>
O’er the sea his song resounded;<br/>
But his measures were discordant,<br/>
And his notes were harsh and frightful.<br/>
Sang the wizard, Lemminkainen,<br/>
Screeched the reckless Kaukomieli,<br/>
Till the mighty war-ship trembled;<br/>
Far and wide was heard his singing,<br/>
Heard his songs upon the waters,<br/>
Heard within the seventh village,<br/>
Heard beyond the seven oceans.<br/>
Sat a crane within the rushes,<br/>
On a hillock clothed in verdure,<br/>
And the crane his toes was counting;<br/>
Suddenly he heard the singing<br/>
Of the wizard, Lemminkainen;<br/>
And the bird was justly frightened<br/>
At the songs of the magician.<br/>
Then with horrid voice, and screeching,<br/>
Flew the crane across the broad-sea<br/>
To the lakes of Sariola,<br/>
O’er Pohyola’s hills and hamlets,<br/>
Screeching, screaming, over Northland,<br/>
Till the people of the darkness<br/>
Were awakened from their slumbers.<br/>
Louhi hastens to her hurdles,<br/>
Hastens to her droves of cattle,<br/>
Hastens also to her garners,<br/>
Counts her herds, inspects her store-house;<br/>
Undisturbed she finds her treasures.<br/>
Quick she journeys to the entrance<br/>
To the copper-bearing mountain,<br/>
Speaks these words as she approaches:<br/>
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated,<br/>
Woe to Louhi, broken-hearted!<br/>
Here the tracks of the destroyers,<br/>
All my locks and bolts are broken<br/>
By the hands of cruel strangers!<br/>
Broken are my iron hinges,<br/>
Open stand the mountain-portals<br/>
Leading to the Northland-treasure.<br/>
Has Pohyola lost her Sampo?”<br/>
Then she hastened to the chambers<br/>
Where the Sampo had been grinding;<br/>
But she found the chambers empty,<br/>
Lid and Sampo gone to others,<br/>
From the stone-berg of Pohyola,<br/>
From behind nine locks of copper,<br/>
In the copper-bearing mountain.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Angry grew and cried for vengeance;<br/>
As she found her fame departing,<br/>
Found her-strength fast disappearing,<br/>
Thus addressed the sea-fog virgin:<br/>
“Daughter of the morning-vapors,<br/>
Sift thy fogs from distant cloud-land,<br/>
Sift the thick air from the heavens,<br/>
Sift thy vapors from the ether,<br/>
On the blue-back of the broad-sea,<br/>
On the far extending waters,<br/>
That the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Friend of ocean-wave and billow,<br/>
May not baffle his pursuers!<br/>
“Should this prayer prove unavailing,<br/>
Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,<br/>
Raise thy head above the billows,<br/>
And destroy Wainola’s heroes,<br/>
Sink them to thy deep sea-castles,<br/>
There devour them at thy pleasure;<br/>
Bring thou back the golden Sampo<br/>
To the people of Pohyola!<br/>
“Should these words be ineffective,<br/>
Ukko, mightiest of rulers,<br/>
Golden king beyond the welkin,<br/>
Sitting on a throne of silver,<br/>
Fill thy skies with heavy storm-clouds,<br/>
Call thy fleetest winds about thee,<br/>
Send them o’er the seven broad-seas,<br/>
There to find the fleeing vessel,<br/>
That the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
May not baffle his pursuers!”<br/>
Quick the virgin of the vapors<br/>
Breathed a fog upon the waters,<br/>
Made it settle on the war-ship<br/>
Of the heroes of the Northland,<br/>
Held the minstrel, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Anchored in the fog and darkness;<br/>
Bound him one day, then a second,<br/>
Then a third till dawn of morning,<br/>
In the middle of the blue-sea,<br/>
Whence he could not flee in safety<br/>
From the wrath of his pursuers.<br/>
When the third night had departed,<br/>
Resting in the sea, and helpless,<br/>
Wainamoinen spake as follows,<br/>
“Not a man of strength and courage,<br/>
Not the weakest of the heroes,<br/>
Who upon the sea will suffer,<br/>
Sink and perish in the vapors,<br/>
Perish in the fog and darkness!”<br/>
With his sword he smote the billows,<br/>
From his magic blade flowed honey;<br/>
Quick the vapor breaks, and rises,<br/>
Leaves the waters clear for rowing;<br/>
Far extend the sky and waters,<br/>
Large the ring of the horizon,<br/>
And the troubled sea enlarges.<br/>
Time had journeyed little distance,<br/>
Scarce a moment had passed over,<br/>
When they heard a mighty roaring,<br/>
Heard a roaring and a rushing<br/>
Near the border of the vessel,<br/>
Where the foam was shooting skyward<br/>
O’er the boat of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Straightway youthful Ilmarinen<br/>
Sank in gravest apprehension,<br/>
From his cheeks the blood departed;<br/>
Pulled his cap down o’er his forehead,<br/>
Shook and trembled with emotion.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Casts his eyes upon the waters<br/>
Near the broad rim of his war-ship;<br/>
There perceives an ocean-wonder<br/>
With his head above the sea-foam.<br/>
Wainamoinen, brave and mighty,<br/>
Seizes quick the water-monster,<br/>
Lifts him by his ears and questions:<br/>
“Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,<br/>
Why art rising from the blue-sea?<br/>
Wherefore dost thou leave thy castle,<br/>
Show thyself to mighty heroes,<br/>
To the heroes of Wainola?”<br/>
Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,<br/>
Ocean monster, manifested<br/>
Neither pleasure, nor displeasure,<br/>
Was not in the least affrighted,<br/>
Did not give the hero answer.<br/>
Whereupon the ancient minstrel,<br/>
Asked the second time the monster,<br/>
Urgently inquired a third time:<br/>
“Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,<br/>
Why art rising from the waters,<br/>
Wherefore dost thou leave the blue-sea?<br/>
Iku-Turso gave this answer:<br/>
For this cause I left my castle<br/>
Underneath the rolling billows:<br/>
Came I here with the intention<br/>
To destroy the Kalew-heroes,<br/>
And return the magic Sampo<br/>
To the people of Pohyola.<br/>
If thou wilt restore my freedom,<br/>
Spare my life, from pain and sorrow,<br/>
I will quick retrace my journey,<br/>
Nevermore to show my visage<br/>
To the people of Wainola,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers<br/>
On the hills of Kalevala!”<br/>
Then the singer, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Freed the monster, Iku-Turso,<br/>
Sent him to his deep sea-castles,<br/>
Spake these words to him departing:<br/>
“Iku-Turso, son of Old-age,<br/>
Nevermore arise from ocean,<br/>
Nevermore let Northland-heroes<br/>
See thy face above the waters I<br/>
Nevermore has Iku-Turso<br/>
Risen to the ocean-level;<br/>
Never since have Northland sailors<br/>
Seen the head of this sea-monster.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Onward rowed his goodly vessel,<br/>
Journeyed but a little distance,<br/>
Scarce a moment had passed over,<br/>
When the King of all creators,<br/>
Mighty Ukko of the heavens,<br/>
Made the winds blow full of power,<br/>
Made the storms arise in fury,<br/>
Made them rage upon the waters.<br/>
From the west the winds came roaring,<br/>
From the north-east came in anger,<br/>
Winds came howling from the south-west,<br/>
Came the winds from all directions,<br/>
In their fury, rolling, roaring,<br/>
Tearing branches from the lindens,<br/>
Hurling needles from the pine-trees,<br/>
Blowing flowers from the heather,<br/>
Grasses blowing from the meadow,<br/>
Tearing up the very bottom<br/>
Of the deep and boundless blue-sea.<br/>
Roared the winds and lashed the waters<br/>
Till the waves were white with fury;<br/>
Tossed the war-ship high in ether,<br/>
Tossed away the harp of fish-bone,<br/>
Magic harp of Wainamoinen,<br/>
To the joy of King Wellamo,<br/>
To the pleasure of his people,<br/>
To the happiness of Ahto,<br/>
Ahto, rising from his caverns,<br/>
On the floods beheld his people<br/>
Carry off the harp of magic<br/>
To their home below the billows.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Heavy-hearted, spake these measures:<br/>
“I have lost what I created,<br/>
I have lost the harp of joyance;<br/>
Now my strength has gone to others,<br/>
All my pleasure too departed,<br/>
All my hope and comfort vanished!<br/>
Nevermore the harp of fish-bone<br/>
Will enchant the hosts of Suomi!”<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Sorrow-laden, spake as follows:<br/>
“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!<br/>
Would that I had never journeyed<br/>
On these waters filled with dangers,<br/>
On the rolling waste before me,<br/>
In this war-ship false and feeble.<br/>
Winds and storms have I encountered,<br/>
Wretched days of toil and trouble,<br/>
I have witnessed in the Northland;<br/>
Never have I met such dangers<br/>
On the land, nor on the ocean,<br/>
Never in my hero life-time!”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Spake and these the words he uttered:<br/>
“Weep no more, my goodly comrades,<br/>
In my bark let no one murmur;<br/>
Weeping cannot mend disaster,<br/>
Tears can never still misfortune,<br/>
Mourning cannot save from evil.<br/>
“Sea, command thy warring forces,<br/>
Bid thy children cease their fury!<br/>
Ahto, still thy surging billows!<br/>
Sink, Wellamo, to thy slumber,<br/>
That our boat may move in safety.<br/>
Rise, ye storm-winds, to your kingdoms,<br/>
Lift your heads above the waters,<br/>
To the regions of your kindred,<br/>
To your people and dominions;<br/>
Cut the trees within the forest,<br/>
Bend the lindens of the valley,<br/>
Let our vessel sail in safety!”<br/>
Then the reckless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Handsome wizard, Kaukomieli,<br/>
Spake these words in supplication:<br/>
“Come, O eagle, Turyalander,<br/>
Bring three feathers from thy pinions,<br/>
Three, O raven, three, O eagle,<br/>
To protect this bark from evil!”<br/>
All the heroes of Wainola<br/>
Call their forces to the rescue,<br/>
And repair the sinking vessel.<br/>
By the aid of master-magic,<br/>
Wainamoinen saved his war-ship,<br/>
Saved his people from destruction,<br/>
Well repaired his ship to battle<br/>
With the roughest seas of Northland;<br/>
Steers his mighty boat in safety<br/>
Through the perils of the whirlpool,<br/>
Through the watery deeps and dangers.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap43"/>RUNE XLIII.<br/>
THE SAMPO LOST IN THE SEA.</h2>
<p>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Called her many tribes together,<br/>
Gave the archers bows and arrows,<br/>
Gave her brave men spears and broadswords;<br/>
Fitted out her mightiest war-ship,<br/>
In the vessel placed her army,<br/>
With their swords a hundred heroes,<br/>
With their bows a thousand archers;<br/>
Quick erected masts and sail-yards,<br/>
On the masts her sails of linen<br/>
Hanging like the clouds of heaven,<br/>
Like the white-clouds in the ether,<br/>
Sailed across the seas of Pohya,<br/>
To re-take the wondrous Sampo<br/>
From the heroes of Wainola.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and faithful,<br/>
Sailed across the deep, blue waters,<br/>
Spake these words to Lemminkainen:<br/>
“O thou daring son of Lempo,<br/>
Best of all my friends and heroes,<br/>
Mount the highest of the topmasts,<br/>
Look before you into ether,<br/>
Look behind you at the heavens,<br/>
Well examine the horizon,<br/>
Whether clear or filled with trouble.”<br/>
Climbed the daring Lemminkainen,<br/>
Ever ready for a venture,<br/>
To the highest of the mastheads;<br/>
Looked he eastward, also westward,<br/>
Looked he northward, also southward,<br/>
Then addressed wise Wainamoinen.<br/>
“Clear the sky appears before me,<br/>
But behind a dark horizon;<br/>
In the north a cloud is rising,<br/>
And a longer cloud at north-west.”<br/>
Wainamoinen thus made answer:<br/>
Art thou speaking truth or fiction?<br/>
I am fearful that the war-ships<br/>
Of Pohyola are pursuing;<br/>
Look again with keener vision.”<br/>
Thereupon wild Lemminkainen<br/>
Looked again and spake as follows:<br/>
“In the distance seems a forest,<br/>
In the south appears an island,<br/>
Aspen-groves with falcons laden,<br/>
Alders laden with the wood-grouse.”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Surely thou art speaking falsehood;<br/>
’Tis no forest in the distance,<br/>
Neither aspen, birch, nor alders,<br/>
Laden with the grouse, or falcon;<br/>
I am fearful that Pohyola<br/>
Follows with her magic armies;<br/>
Look again with keener vision.”<br/>
Then the daring Lemminkainen<br/>
Looked the third time from the topmast,<br/>
Spake and these the words be uttered:<br/>
“From the north a boat pursues us,<br/>
Driven by a hundred rowers,<br/>
Carrying a thousand heroes!”<br/>
Knew at last old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Knew the truth of his inquiry,<br/>
Thus addressed his fleeing people:<br/>
“Row, O blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Row, O mighty Lemminkainen,<br/>
Row, all ye my noble oarsmen,<br/>
That our boat may skim the waters,<br/>
May escape from our pursuers!”<br/>
Rowed the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Rowed the mighty Lemminkainen,<br/>
With them rowed the other heroes;<br/>
Heavily groaned the helm of birch-wood,<br/>
Loudly rattled all the row-locks;<br/>
All the vessel shook and trembled,<br/>
Like a cataract it thundered<br/>
As it plowed the waste of waters,<br/>
Tossing sea-foam to the heavens.<br/>
Strongly rowed Wainola’s forces,<br/>
Strongly were their arms united;<br/>
But the distance did not widen<br/>
Twixt the boat and their pursuers.<br/>
Quick the hero, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Saw misfortune hanging over,<br/>
Saw destruction in the distance<br/>
Heavy-hearted, long reflecting,<br/>
Trouble-laden, spake as follows:<br/>
“Only is there one salvation,<br/>
Know one miracle for safety!”<br/>
Then he grasped his box of tinder,<br/>
From the box he took a flint-stone,<br/>
Of the tinder took some fragments,<br/>
Cast the fragments on the waters,<br/>
Spake these words of master-magic.<br/>
“Let from these arise a mountain<br/>
From the bottom of the deep-sea,<br/>
Let a rock arise in water,<br/>
That the war-ship of Pohyola,<br/>
With her thousand men and heroes,<br/>
May be wrecked upon the summit,<br/>
By the aid of surging billows.”<br/>
Instantly a reef arises,<br/>
In the sea springs up a mountain,<br/>
Eastward, westward, through the waters.<br/>
Came the war-ship of the Northland,<br/>
Through the floods the boat came steering,<br/>
Sailed against the mountain-ledges,<br/>
Fastened on the rocks in water,<br/>
Wrecked upon the Mount of Magic.<br/>
In the deep-sea fell the topmasts,<br/>
Fell the sails upon the billows,<br/>
Carried by the winds and waters<br/>
O’er the waves of toil and trouble.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Tries to free her sinking vessel,<br/>
Tries to rescue from destruction;<br/>
But she cannot raise the war-ship,<br/>
Firmly fixed upon the mountain;<br/>
Shattered are the ribs and rudder,<br/>
Ruined is the ship of Pohya.<br/>
Then the hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Much disheartened, spake as follows:<br/>
“Where the force, in earth or heaven,<br/>
That will help a soul in trouble?”<br/>
Quick she changes form and feature,<br/>
Makes herself another body;<br/>
Takes five sharpened scythes of iron,<br/>
Also takes five goodly sickles,<br/>
Shapes them into eagle-talons;<br/>
Takes the body of the vessel,<br/>
Makes the frame-work of an eagle;<br/>
Takes the vessel’s ribs and flooring<br/>
Makes them into wings and breastplate;<br/>
For the tail she shapes the rudder;<br/>
In the wings she plants a thousand<br/>
Seniors with their bows and arrows;<br/>
Sets a thousand magic heroes<br/>
In the body, armed with broadswords<br/>
In the tail a hundred archers,<br/>
With their deadly spears and cross-bows,<br/>
Thus the bird is hero-feathered.<br/>
Quick she spreads her mighty pinions,<br/>
Rises as a monster-eagle,<br/>
Flies on high, and soars, and circles<br/>
With one wing she sweeps the heavens,<br/>
While the other sweeps the waters.<br/>
Spake the hero’s ocean-mother:<br/>
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Turn thy vision to the north-east,<br/>
Cast thine eyes upon the sunrise,<br/>
Look behind thy fleeing vessel,<br/>
See the eagle of misfortune!”<br/>
Wainamoinen turned as bidden,<br/>
Turned his vision to the north-east,<br/>
Cast his eyes upon the sunrise,<br/>
There beheld the Northland-hostess,<br/>
Wicked witch of Sariola,<br/>
Flying as a monster-eagle,<br/>
Swooping on his mighty war-ship;<br/>
Flies and perches on the topmast,<br/>
On the sail-yards firmly settles;<br/>
Nearly overturns the vessel<br/>
Of the heroes of Wainola,<br/>
Underneath the weight of envy.<br/>
Then the hero, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Turned to Ukko as his refuge,<br/>
Thus entreated his Creator:<br/>
“Ukko, thou O God in heaven,<br/>
Thou Creator full of mercy,<br/>
Guard us from impending danger,<br/>
That thy children may not perish,<br/>
May not meet with fell destruction.<br/>
Hither bring thy magic fire-cloak,<br/>
That thy people, thus protected,<br/>
May resist Pohyola’s forces,<br/>
Well may fight against the hostess<br/>
Of the dismal Sariola,<br/>
May not fall before her weapons,<br/>
May not in the deep-sea perish!”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Thus addressed the ancient Louhi:<br/>
“O thou hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Wilt thou now divide the Sampo,<br/>
On the fog-point in the water,<br/>
On the island forest-covered?<br/>
Thus the Northland hostess answered:<br/>
“I will not divide the Sampo,<br/>
Not with thee, thou evil wizard,<br/>
Not with wicked Wainamoinen!”<br/>
Quick the mighty eagle, Louhi,<br/>
Swoops upon the lid in colors,<br/>
Grasps the Sampo in her talons;<br/>
But the daring Lemminkainen<br/>
Straightway draws his blade of battle,<br/>
Draws his broadsword from his girdle,<br/>
Cleaves the talons of the eagle,<br/>
One toe only is uninjured,<br/>
Speaks these magic words of conquest:<br/>
“Down, ye spears, and down, ye broadswords,<br/>
Down, ye thousand witless heroes,<br/>
Down, ye feathered hosts of Louhi!”<br/>
Spake the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Calling, screeching, from the sail-yards:<br/>
“O thou faithless Lemminkainen,<br/>
Wicked wizard, Kaukomieli,<br/>
To deceive thy trusting mother!<br/>
Thou didst give to her thy promise,<br/>
Not to go to war for ages,<br/>
Not to war for sixty summers,<br/>
Though desire for gold impels thee,<br/>
Though thou wishest gold and silver!<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient hero,<br/>
The eternal wisdom-singer,<br/>
Thinking he had met destruction,<br/>
Snatched the rudder from the waters,<br/>
With it smote the monster-eagle,<br/>
Smote the eagle’s iron talons,<br/>
Smote her countless feathered heroes.<br/>
From her breast her hosts descended,<br/>
Spearmen fell upon the billows,<br/>
From the wings descend a thousand,<br/>
From the tail, a hundred archers.<br/>
Swoops again the bird of Pohya<br/>
To the bottom of the vessel,<br/>
Like the hawk from birch or aspen,<br/>
Like the falcon from the linden;<br/>
Grasps the Sampo with one talon,<br/>
Drags the treasure to the waters,<br/>
Drops the magic lid in colors<br/>
From the red rim of the war-ship<br/>
To the bottom of the deep-sea,<br/>
Where the Sampo breaks in pieces,<br/>
Scatters through the Alue-waters,<br/>
In the mighty deeps for ages,<br/>
To increase the ocean’s treasures,<br/>
Treasures for the hosts of Ahto.<br/>
Nevermore will there be wanting<br/>
Richness for the Ahto-nation,<br/>
Never while the moonlight brightens<br/>
On the waters of the Northland.<br/>
Many fragments of the Sampo<br/>
Floated on the purple waters,<br/>
On the waters deep and boundless,<br/>
Rocked by winds and waves of Suomi,<br/>
Carried by the rolling billows<br/>
To the sea-sides of Wainola.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Saw the fragments of the treasure<br/>
Floating on the billows landward,<br/>
Fragments of the lid in colors,<br/>
Much rejoicing, spake as follows:<br/>
“Thence will come the sprouting seed-grain,<br/>
The beginning of good fortune,<br/>
The unending of resources,<br/>
From the plowing and the sowing,<br/>
From the glimmer of the moonlight,<br/>
From the splendor of the sunshine,<br/>
On the fertile plains of Suomi,<br/>
On the meads of Kalevala.”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Thus addressed old Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Know I other mighty measures,<br/>
Know I means that are efficient,<br/>
And against thy golden moonlight,<br/>
And the splendor of thy sunshine,<br/>
And thy plowing, and thy reaping;<br/>
In the rocks I’ll sink the moonbeams,<br/>
Hide the sun within the mountain,<br/>
Let the frost destroy thy sowings,<br/>
Freeze the crops on all thy corn-fields;<br/>
Iron-hail I’ll send from heaven,<br/>
On the richness of thine acres,<br/>
On the barley of thy planting;<br/>
I will drive the bear from forests,<br/>
Send thee Otso from the thickets,<br/>
That he may destroy thy cattle,<br/>
May annihilate thy sheep-folds,<br/>
May destroy thy steeds at pasture.<br/>
I will send thee nine diseases,<br/>
Each more fatal than the other,<br/>
That will sicken all thy people,<br/>
Make thy children sink and perish,<br/>
Nevermore to visit Northland,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers<br/>
On the plains of Kalevala!”<br/>
Thus the ancient bard made answer:<br/>
“Not a Laplander can banish<br/>
Wainamoinen and his people;<br/>
Never can a Turyalander<br/>
Drive my tribes from Kalevala;<br/>
God alone has power to banish,<br/>
God controls the fate of nations,<br/>
Never trusts the arms of evil,<br/>
Never gives His strength to others.<br/>
As I trust in my Creator,<br/>
Call upon benignant Ukko,<br/>
He will guard my crops from danger<br/>
Drive the Frost-fiend from my corn-fields,<br/>
Drive great Otso to his caverns.<br/>
“Wicked Louhi of Pohyola,<br/>
Thou canst banish evil-doers,<br/>
In the rocks canst hide the wicked,<br/>
In thy mountains lock the guilty;<br/>
Thou canst never hide the moonlight,<br/>
Never bide the silver sunshine,<br/>
In the caverns of thy kingdom.<br/>
Freeze the crops of thine own planting,<br/>
Freeze the barley of thy sowing,<br/>
Send thine iron-hail from heaven<br/>
To destroy the Lapland corn-fields,<br/>
To annihilate thy people,<br/>
To destroy the hosts of Pohya;<br/>
Send great Otso from the heather,<br/>
Send the sharp-tooth from the forest,<br/>
To the fields of Sariola,<br/>
On the herds and flocks of Louhi!”<br/>
Thus the wicked hostess answered:<br/>
“All my power has departed,<br/>
All my strength has gone to others,<br/>
All my hope is in the deep-sea;<br/>
In the waters lies my Sampo!”<br/>
Then the hostess of Pohyola<br/>
Home departed, weeping, wailing,<br/>
To the land of cold and darkness;<br/>
Only took some worthless fragments<br/>
Of the Sampo to her people;<br/>
Carried she the lid to Pohya,<br/>
In the blue-sea left the handle;<br/>
Hence the poverty of Northland,<br/>
And the famines of Pohyola.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Hastened to the broad-sea’s margin,<br/>
Stepped upon the shore in joyance;<br/>
Found there fragments of the Sampo,<br/>
Fragments of the lid in colors,<br/>
On the borders of the waters,<br/>
On the curving sands and sea-sides;<br/>
Gathered well the Sampo-relics<br/>
From the waters near the fog-point,<br/>
On the island forest-covered.<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Spake these words in supplication:<br/>
“Grant, O Ukko, our Creator,<br/>
Grant to us, thy needful children,<br/>
Peace, and happiness, and plenty,<br/>
That our lives may be successful,<br/>
That our days may end in honor,<br/>
On the vales and hills of Suomi,<br/>
On the prairies of Wainola,<br/>
In the homes of Kalevala!<br/>
“Ukko, wise and good Creator,<br/>
Ukko, God of love and mercy,<br/>
Shelter and protect thy people<br/>
From the evil-minded heroes,<br/>
From the wiles of wicked women,<br/>
That our country’s plagues may leave us,<br/>
That thy faithful tribes may prosper.<br/>
Be our friend and strong protector,<br/>
Be the helper of thy children,<br/>
In the night a roof above them,<br/>
In the day a shield around them,<br/>
That the sunshine may not vanish,<br/>
That the moonlight may not lessen,<br/>
That the killing frosts may leave them,<br/>
And destructive hail pass over.<br/>
Build a metal wall around us,<br/>
From the valleys to the heavens;<br/>
Build of stone a mighty fortress<br/>
On the borders of Wainola,<br/>
Where thy people live and labor,<br/>
As their dwelling-place forever,<br/>
Sure protection to thy people,<br/>
Where the wicked may not enter,<br/>
Nor the thieves break through and pilfer,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glistens,<br/>
And the Sun brings golden blessings<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap44"/>RUNE XLIV.<br/>
BIRTH OF THE SECOND HARP.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Long reflecting, sang these measures:<br/>
“It is now the time befitting<br/>
To awaken joy and gladness,<br/>
Time for me to touch the harp-strings,<br/>
Time to sing the songs primeval,<br/>
In these spacious halls and mansions,<br/>
In these homes of Kalevala;<br/>
But, alas! my harp lies hidden,<br/>
Sunk upon the deep-sea’s bottom,<br/>
To the salmon’s hiding-places,<br/>
To the dwellings of the whiting,<br/>
To the people of Wellamo,<br/>
Where the Northland-pike assemble.<br/>
Nevermore will I regain it,<br/>
Ahto never will return it,<br/>
Joy and music gone forever!<br/>
“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Forge for me a rake of iron,<br/>
Thickly set the teeth of copper,<br/>
Many fathoms long the handle;<br/>
Make a rake to search the waters,<br/>
Search the broad-sea to the bottom,<br/>
Rake the weeds and reeds together,<br/>
Rake them to the curving sea-shore,<br/>
That I may regain my treasure,<br/>
May regain my harp of fish-bow<br/>
From the whiting’s place of resting,<br/>
From the caverns of the salmon,<br/>
From the castles of Wellamo.”<br/>
Thereupon young Ilmarinen,<br/>
The eternal metal-worker,<br/>
Forges well a rake of iron,<br/>
Teeth in length a hundred fathoms,<br/>
And a thousand long the handle,<br/>
Thickly sets the teeth of copper.<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Takes the rake of magic metals,<br/>
Travels but a little distance,<br/>
To the cylinders of oak-wood,<br/>
To the copper-banded rollers,<br/>
Where he finds two ships awaiting,<br/>
One was new, the other ancient.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and faithful,<br/>
Thus addressed the new-made vessel:<br/>
“Go, thou boat of master-magic,<br/>
Hasten to the willing waters,<br/>
Speed away upon the blue-sea,<br/>
And without the hand to move thee;<br/>
Let my will impel thee seaward.”<br/>
Quick the boat rolled to the billows<br/>
On the cylinders of oak-wood,<br/>
Quick descended to the waters,<br/>
Willingly obeyed his master.<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
Then began to rake the sea-beds,<br/>
Raked up all the water-flowers,<br/>
Bits of broken reeds and rushes,<br/>
Deep-sea shells and colored pebbles,<br/>
Did not find his harp of fish-bone,<br/>
Lost forever to Wainola!<br/>
Thereupon the ancient minstrel<br/>
Left the waters, homeward hastened,<br/>
Cap pulled clown upon his forehead,<br/>
Sang this song with sorrow laden:<br/>
“Nevermore shall I awaken<br/>
With my harp-strings, joy and gladness!<br/>
Nevermore will Wainamoinen<br/>
Charm the people of the Northland<br/>
With the harp of his creation!<br/>
Nevermore my songs will echo<br/>
O’er the hills of Kalevala!”<br/>
Thereupon the ancient singer<br/>
Went lamenting through the forest,<br/>
Wandered through the sighing pine-woods,<br/>
Heard the wailing of a birch-tree,<br/>
Heard a juniper complaining;<br/>
Drawing nearer, waits and listens,<br/>
Thus the birch-tree he addresses:<br/>
“Wherefore, brother, art thou weeping,<br/>
Merry birch enrobed in silver,<br/>
Silver-leaved and silver-tasselled?<br/>
Art thou shedding tears of sorrow,<br/>
Since thou art not led to battle,<br/>
Not enforced to war with wizards?<br/>
Wisely does the birch make answer:<br/>
“This the language of the many,<br/>
Others speak as thou, unjustly,<br/>
That I only live in pleasure,<br/>
That my silver leaves and tassels<br/>
Only whisper my rejoicings;<br/>
That I have no cares, no sorrows,<br/>
That I have no hours unhappy,<br/>
Knowing neither pain nor trouble.<br/>
I am weeping for my smallness,<br/>
Am lamenting for my weakness,<br/>
Have no sympathy, no pity,<br/>
Stand here motionless for ages,<br/>
Stand alone in fen and forest,<br/>
In these woodlands vast and joyless.<br/>
Others hope for coming summers,<br/>
For the beauties of the spring-time;<br/>
I, alas! a helpless birch-tree,<br/>
Dread the changing of the seasons,<br/>
I must give my bark to, others,<br/>
Lose my leaves and silken tassels.<br/>
Men come the Suomi children,<br/>
Peel my bark and drink my life-blood:<br/>
Wicked shepherds in the summer,<br/>
Come and steal my belt of silver,<br/>
Of my bark make berry-baskets,<br/>
Dishes make, and cups for drinking.<br/>
Oftentimes the Northland maidens<br/>
Cut my tender limbs for birch-brooms,’<br/>
Bind my twigs and silver tassels<br/>
Into brooms to sweep their cabins;<br/>
Often have the Northland heroes<br/>
Chopped me into chips for burning;<br/>
Three times in the summer season,<br/>
In the pleasant days of spring-time,<br/>
Foresters have ground their axes<br/>
On my silver trunk and branches,<br/>
Robbed me of my life for ages;<br/>
This my spring-time joy and pleasure,<br/>
This my happiness in summer,<br/>
And my winter days no better!<br/>
When I think of former troubles,<br/>
Sorrow settles on my visage,<br/>
And my face grows white with anguish;<br/>
Often do the winds of winter<br/>
And the hoar-frost bring me sadness,<br/>
Blast my tender leaves and tassels,<br/>
Bear my foliage to others,<br/>
Rob me of my silver raiment,<br/>
Leave me naked on the mountain,<br/>
Lone, and helpless, and disheartened!”<br/>
Spake the good, old Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Weep no longer, sacred birch-tree,<br/>
Mourn no more, my friend and brother,<br/>
Thou shalt have a better fortune;<br/>
I will turn thy grief to joyance,<br/>
Make thee laugh and sing with gladness.”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Made a harp from sacred birch-wood,<br/>
Fashioned in the days of summer,<br/>
Beautiful the harp of magic,<br/>
By the master’s hand created<br/>
On the fog-point in the Big-Sea,<br/>
On the island forest-covered,<br/>
Fashioned from the birch the archings,<br/>
And the frame-work from the aspen.<br/>
These the words of the magician:<br/>
“All the archings are completed,<br/>
And the frame is fitly finished;<br/>
Whence the hooks and pins for tuning,<br/>
That the harp may sing in concord?”<br/>
Near the way-side grew an oak-tree,<br/>
Skyward grew with equal branches,<br/>
On each twig an acorn growing,<br/>
Golden balls upon each acorn,<br/>
On each ball a singing cuckoo.<br/>
As each cuckoo’s call resounded,<br/>
Five the notes of song that issued<br/>
From the songster’s throat of joyance;<br/>
From each throat came liquid music,<br/>
Gold and silver for the master,<br/>
Flowing to the hills and hillocks,<br/>
To the silvery vales and mountains;<br/>
Thence he took the merry harp-pins,<br/>
That the harp might play in concord.<br/>
Spake again wise Wainamoinen:<br/>
“I the pins have well completed,<br/>
Still the harp is yet unfinished;<br/>
Now I need five strings for playing,<br/>
Where shall I procure the harp-strings?”<br/>
Then the ancient bard and minstrel<br/>
Journeyed through the fen and forest.<br/>
On a hillock sat a maiden,<br/>
Sat a virgin of the valley;<br/>
And the maiden was not weeping,<br/>
Joyful was the sylvan daughter,<br/>
Singing with the woodland songsters,<br/>
That the eventide might hasten,<br/>
In the hope that her beloved<br/>
Would the sooner sit beside her.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusted,<br/>
Hastened, tripping to the virgin,<br/>
Asked her for her golden ringleta,<br/>
These the words of the magician.<br/>
“Give me, maiden, of thy tresses,<br/>
Give to me thy golden ringlets;<br/>
I will weave them into harp-strings,<br/>
To the joy of Wainamoinen,<br/>
To the pleasure of his people.”<br/>
Thereupon the forest-maiden<br/>
Gave the singer of her tresses,<br/>
Gave him of her golden ringlets,<br/>
And of these he made the harp-strings.<br/>
Sources of eternal pleasure<br/>
To the people of Wainola.<br/>
Thus the sacred harp is finished,<br/>
And the minstrel, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Sits upon the rock of joyance,<br/>
Takes the harp within his fingers,<br/>
Turns the arch up, looking skyward;<br/>
With his knee the arch supporting,<br/>
Sets the strings in tuneful order,<br/>
Runs his fingers o’er the harp-strings,<br/>
And the notes of pleasure follow.<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
The eternal wisdom-singer,<br/>
Plays upon his harp of birch-wood.<br/>
Far away is heard the music,<br/>
Wide the harp of joy re-echoes;<br/>
Mountains dance and valleys listen,<br/>
Flinty rocks are tom asunder,<br/>
Stones are hurled upon the waters,<br/>
Pebbles swim upon the Big-Sea,<br/>
Pines and lindens laugh with pleasure,<br/>
Alders skip about the heather,<br/>
And the aspen sways in concord.<br/>
All the daughters of Wainola<br/>
Straightway leave their shining needles,<br/>
Hasten forward like the current,<br/>
Speed along like rapid rivers,<br/>
That they may enjoy and wonder.<br/>
Laugh the younger men and maidens,<br/>
Happy-hearted are the matrons<br/>
Flying swift to bear the playing,<br/>
To enjoy the common pleasure,<br/>
Hear the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Aged men and bearded seniors,<br/>
Gray-haired mothers with their daughters<br/>
Stop in wonderment and listen.<br/>
Creeps the babe in full enjoyment<br/>
As he hears the magic singing,<br/>
Hears the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
All of Northland stops in wonder,<br/>
Speaks in unison these measures:<br/>
“Never have we heard such playing,<br/>
Never heard such strains of music,<br/>
Never since the earth was fashioned,<br/>
As the songs of this magician,<br/>
This sweet singer, Wainamoinen!”<br/>
Far and wide the sweet tones echo,<br/>
Ring throughout the seven hamlets,<br/>
O’er the seven islands echo;<br/>
Every creature of the Northland<br/>
Hastens forth to look and listen,<br/>
Listen to the songs of gladness,<br/>
To the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
All the beasts that haunt the woodlands<br/>
Fall upon their knees and wonder<br/>
At the playing of the minstrel,<br/>
At his miracles of concord.<br/>
All the songsters of the forests<br/>
Perch upon the trembling branches,<br/>
Singing to the wondrous playing<br/>
Of the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
All the dwellers of the waters<br/>
Leave their beds, and eaves, and grottoes,<br/>
Swim against the shore and listen<br/>
To the playing of the minstrel,<br/>
To the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
All the little things in nature,<br/>
Rise from earth, and fall from ether,<br/>
Come and listen to the music,<br/>
To the notes of the enchanter,<br/>
To the songs of the magician,<br/>
To the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Plays the singer of the Northland,<br/>
Plays in miracles of sweetness,<br/>
Plays one day, and then a second,<br/>
Plays the third from morn till even;<br/>
Plays within the halls and cabins,<br/>
In the dwellings of his people,<br/>
Till the floors and ceilings echo,<br/>
Till resound the roofs of pine-wood,<br/>
Till the windows speak and tremble,<br/>
Till the portals echo joyance,<br/>
And the hearth-stones sing in pleasure.<br/>
As he journeys through the forest,<br/>
As he wanders through the woodlands,<br/>
Pine and sorb-tree bid him welcome,<br/>
Birch and willow bend obeisance,<br/>
Beech and aspen bow submission;<br/>
And the linden waves her branches<br/>
To the measure of his playing,<br/>
To the notes of the magician.<br/>
As the minstrel plays and wanders,<br/>
Sings upon the mead and heather,<br/>
Glen and hill his songs re-echo,<br/>
Ferns and flowers laugh in pleasure,<br/>
And the shrubs attune their voices<br/>
To the music of the harp-strings,<br/>
To the songs of Wainamoinen.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap45"/>RUNE XLV.<br/>
BIRTH OF THE NINE DISEASES.</h2>
<p>Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Heard the word in Sariola,<br/>
Heard the Dews with ears of envy,<br/>
That Wainola lives and prospers,<br/>
That Osmoinen’s wealth increases,<br/>
Through the ruins of the Sampo,<br/>
Ruins of the lid in colors.<br/>
Thereupon her wrath she kindled,<br/>
Well considered, long reflected,<br/>
How she might prepare destruction<br/>
For the people of Wainola,<br/>
For the tribes of Kalevala.<br/>
With this prayer she turns to Ukko,<br/>
Thus entreats the god of thunder:<br/>
“Ukko, thou who art in heaven,<br/>
Help me slay Wainola’s people<br/>
With thine iron-hail of justice,<br/>
With thine arrows tipped with lightning,<br/>
Or from sickness let them perish,<br/>
Let them die the death deserving;<br/>
Let the men die in the forest,<br/>
And the women in the hurdles!”<br/>
The blind daughter of Tuoni,<br/>
Old and wicked witch, Lowyatar,<br/>
Worst of all the Death-land women,<br/>
Ugliest of Mana’s children,<br/>
Source of all the host of evils,<br/>
All the ills and plagues of Northland,<br/>
Black in heart, and soul, and visage,<br/>
Evil genius of Lappala,<br/>
Made her couch along the wayside,<br/>
On the fields of sin and sorrow;<br/>
Turned her back upon the East-wind,<br/>
To the source of stormy weather,<br/>
To the chilling winds of morning.<br/>
When the winds arose at evening,<br/>
Heavy-laden grew Lowyatar,<br/>
Through the east-wind’s impregnation,<br/>
On the sand-plains, vast and barren.<br/>
Long she bore her weight of trouble,<br/>
Many morns she suffered anguish,<br/>
Till at last she leaves the desert,<br/>
Makes her couch within the forest,<br/>
On a rock upon the mountain;<br/>
Labors long to leave her burden<br/>
By the mountain-springs and fountains,<br/>
By the crystal waters flowing,<br/>
By the sacred stream and whirlpool,<br/>
By the cataract and fire-stream;<br/>
But her burden does not lighten.<br/>
Blind Lowyatar, old and ugly,<br/>
Knew not where to look for succor,<br/>
How to lose her weight of sorrow,<br/>
Where to lay her evil children.<br/>
Spake the Highest from the heavens,<br/>
These, the words of mighty Ukko:<br/>
“Is a triangle in Swamp-field,<br/>
Near the border of the ocean,<br/>
In the never-pleasant Northland,<br/>
In the dismal Sariola;<br/>
Thither go and lay thy burden,<br/>
In Pohyola leave thine offspring;<br/>
There the Laplanders await thee,<br/>
There will bid thy children welcome.”<br/>
Thereupon the blind Lowyatar,<br/>
Blackest daughter of Tuoni,<br/>
Mana’s old and ugly maiden,<br/>
Hastened on her journey northward,<br/>
To the chambers of Pohyola,<br/>
To the ancient halls of Louhi,<br/>
There to lay her heavy burdens,<br/>
There to leave her evil offspring.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Old and toothless witch of Pohya,<br/>
Takes Lowyatar to her mansion;<br/>
Silently she leads the stranger<br/>
To the bath-rooms of her chamber,<br/>
Pours the foaming beer of barley,<br/>
Lubricates the bolts and hinges,<br/>
That their movements may be secret,<br/>
Speaks these measures to Lowyatar:<br/>
“Faithful daughter of Creation,<br/>
Thou most beautiful of women,<br/>
First and last of ancient mothers,<br/>
Hasten on thy feet to ocean,<br/>
To the ocean’s centre hasten,<br/>
Take the sea-foam from the waters,<br/>
Take the honey of the mermaids,<br/>
And anoint thy sacred members,<br/>
That thy labors may be lightened.<br/>
“Should all this be unavailing,<br/>
Ukko, thou who art in heaven,<br/>
Hasten hither, thou art needed,<br/>
Come thou to thy child in trouble,<br/>
Help the helpless and afflicted.<br/>
Take thy golden-colored sceptre,<br/>
Charm away opposing forces,<br/>
Strike the pillars of the stronghold,<br/>
Open all resisting portals,<br/>
That the great and small may wander<br/>
From their ancient hiding-places,<br/>
Through the courts and halls of freedom.”<br/>
Finally the blind Lowyatar,<br/>
Wicked witch of Tuonela,<br/>
Was delivered of her burden,<br/>
Laid her offspring in the cradle,<br/>
Underneath the golden covers.<br/>
Thus at last were born nine children,<br/>
In an evening of the summer,<br/>
From Lowyatar, blind and ancient,<br/>
Ugly daughter of Tuoni.<br/>
Faithfully the virgin-mother<br/>
Guards her children in affection,<br/>
As an artist loves and nurses<br/>
What his skillful hands have fashioned.<br/>
Thus Lowyatar named her offspring,<br/>
Colic, Pleurisy, and Fever,<br/>
Ulcer, Plague, and dread Consumption,<br/>
Gout, Sterility, and Cancer.<br/>
And the worst of these nine children<br/>
Blind Lowyatar quickly banished,<br/>
Drove away as an enchanter,<br/>
To bewitch the lowland people,<br/>
To engender strife and envy.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Banished all the other children<br/>
To the fog-point in the ocean,<br/>
To the island forest-covered;<br/>
Banished all the fatal creatures,<br/>
Gave these wicked sons of evil<br/>
To the people of Wainola,<br/>
To the youth of Kalevala,<br/>
For the Kalew-tribe’s destruction.<br/>
Quick Wainola’s maidens sicken,<br/>
Young and aged, men and heroes,<br/>
With the worst of all diseases,<br/>
With diseases new and nameless;<br/>
Sick and dying is Wainola.<br/>
Thereupon old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Wise and wonderful enchanter,<br/>
Hastens to his people’s rescue,<br/>
Hastens to a war with Mana,<br/>
To a conflict with Tuoni,<br/>
To destroy the evil children<br/>
Of the evil maid, Lowyatar.<br/>
Wainamoinen heats the bath-rooms,<br/>
Heats the blocks of healing-sandstone<br/>
With the magic wood of Northland,<br/>
Gathered by the sacred river;<br/>
Water brings in covered buckets<br/>
From the cataract and whirlpool;<br/>
Brooms he brings enwrapped with ermine,<br/>
Well the bath the healer cleanses,<br/>
Softens well the brooms of birch-wood;<br/>
Then a honey-heat be wakens,<br/>
Fills the rooms with healing vapors,<br/>
From the virtue of the pebbles<br/>
Glowing in the heat of magic,<br/>
Thus he speaks in supplication:<br/>
“Come, O Ukko, to my rescue,<br/>
God of mercy, lend thy presence,<br/>
Give these vapor-baths new virtues,<br/>
Grant to them the powers of healing,<br/>
And restore my dying people;<br/>
Drive away these fell diseases,<br/>
Banish them to the unworthy,<br/>
Let the holy sparks enkindle,<br/>
Keep this heat in healing limits,<br/>
That it may not harm thy children,<br/>
May not injure the afflicted.<br/>
When I pour the sacred waters<br/>
On the heated blocks of sandstone,<br/>
May the water turn to honey<br/>
Laden with the balm of healing.<br/>
Let the stream of magic virtues<br/>
Ceaseless flow to all my children,<br/>
From this bath enrolled in sea-moss,<br/>
That the guiltless may not suffer,<br/>
That my tribe-folk may not perish,<br/>
Till the Master gives permission,<br/>
Until Ukko sends his minions,<br/>
Sends diseases of his choosing,<br/>
To destroy my trusting people.<br/>
Let the hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Wicked witch that sent these troubles,<br/>
Suffer from a gnawing conscience,<br/>
Suffer for her evil doings.<br/>
Should the Master of Wainola<br/>
Lose his magic skill and weaken,<br/>
Should he prove of little service<br/>
To deliver from misfortune,<br/>
To deliver from these evils,<br/>
Then may Ukko be our healer,<br/>
Be our strength and wise Physician.<br/>
“Omnipresent God of mercy,<br/>
Thou who livest in the heavens,<br/>
Hasten hither, thou art needed,<br/>
Hasten to thine ailing children,<br/>
To observe their cruel tortures,<br/>
To dispel these fell diseases,<br/>
Drive destruction from our borders.<br/>
Bring with thee thy mighty fire-sword,<br/>
Bring to me thy blade of lightning,<br/>
That I may subdue these evils,<br/>
That these monsters I may banish,<br/>
Send these pains, and ills, and tortures,<br/>
To the empire of Tuoni,<br/>
To the kingdom of the east-winds,<br/>
To the islands of the wicked,<br/>
To the caverns of the demons,<br/>
To the rocks within the mountains,<br/>
To the hidden beds of iron,<br/>
That the rocks may fall and sicken,<br/>
And the beds of iron perish.<br/>
Rocks and metals do not murmur<br/>
At the hands of the invader.<br/>
“Torture-daughter of Tuoni,<br/>
Sitting on the mount of anguish,<br/>
At the junction of three rivers,<br/>
Turning rocks of pain and torture,<br/>
Turn away these fell diseases<br/>
Through the virtues of the blue-stone;<br/>
Lead them to the water-channels,<br/>
Sink them in the deeps of ocean,<br/>
Where the winds can never find them,<br/>
Where the sunlight never enters.<br/>
“Should this prayer prove unavailing,<br/>
O, Health-virgin, maid of beauty<br/>
Come and heal my dying people,<br/>
Still their agonies and anguish,<br/>
Give them consciousness and comfort,<br/>
Give them healthful rest and slumber;<br/>
These diseases take and banish,<br/>
Take them in thy copper vessel,<br/>
To thy eaves within the mountains,<br/>
To the summit of the Pain-rock,<br/>
Hurl them to thy boiling caldrons.<br/>
In the mountain is a touch-stone,<br/>
Lucky-stone of ancient story,<br/>
With a hole bored through the centre,<br/>
Through this pour these pains and tortures,<br/>
Wretched feelings, thoughts of evil,<br/>
Human ailments, days unlucky,<br/>
Tribulations, and misfortunes,<br/>
That they may not rise at evening,<br/>
May not see the light of morning.”<br/>
Ending thus, old Wainamoinen,<br/>
The eternal, wise enchanter,<br/>
Rubbed his sufferers with balsams,<br/>
Rubbed the tissues, red and painful,<br/>
With the balm of healing flowers,<br/>
Balsams made of herbs enchanted,<br/>
Sprinkled all with healing vapors,<br/>
Spake these words in supplication.<br/>
“Ukko, thou who art in heaven,<br/>
God of justice, and of mercy,<br/>
Send us from the east a rain-cloud,<br/>
Send a dark cloud from the North-west,<br/>
From the north let fall a third one,<br/>
Send us mingled rain and honey,<br/>
Balsam from the great Physician,<br/>
To remove this plague of Northland.<br/>
What I know of healing measures,<br/>
Only comes from my Creator;<br/>
Lend me, therefore, of thy wisdom,<br/>
That I may relieve my people,<br/>
Save them from the fell destroyer,<br/>
If my hands should fall in virtue,<br/>
Let the hands of Ukko follow,<br/>
God alone can save from trouble.<br/>
Come to us with thine enchantment,<br/>
Speak the magic words of healing,<br/>
That my people may not perish;<br/>
Give to all alleviation<br/>
From their sicknesses and sorrows;<br/>
In the morning, in the evening,<br/>
Let their wasting ailments vanish;<br/>
Drive the Death-child from Wainola,<br/>
Nevermore to visit Northland,<br/>
Never in the course of ages,<br/>
Never while the moonlight glimmers<br/>
O’er the lakes of Kalevala.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, the enchanter,<br/>
The eternal wisdom-singer,<br/>
Thus expelled the nine diseases,<br/>
Evil children or Lowyatar,<br/>
Healed the tribes of Kalevala,<br/>
Saved his people from destruction.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap46"/>RUNE XLVI.<br/>
OTSO THE HONEY-EATER.</h2>
<p>Came the tidings to Pohyola,<br/>
To the village of the Northland,<br/>
That Wainola had recovered<br/>
From her troubles and misfortunes,<br/>
From her sicknesses and sorrows.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Toothless dame of Sariola,<br/>
Envy-laden, spake these measures:<br/>
“Know I other means of trouble,<br/>
I have many more resources;<br/>
I will drive the bear before me,<br/>
From the heather and the mountain,<br/>
Drive him from the fen and forest,<br/>
Drive great Otso from the glen-wood<br/>
On the cattle of Wainola,<br/>
On the flocks of Kalevala.”<br/>
Thereupon the Northland hostess<br/>
Drove the hungry bear of Pohya<br/>
From his cavern to the meadows,<br/>
To Wainola’s plains and pastures.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
To his brother spake as follows:<br/>
“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Forge a spear from magic metals,<br/>
Forge a lancet triple-pointed,<br/>
Forge the handle out of copper,<br/>
That I may destroy great Otso,<br/>
Slay the mighty bear of Northland,<br/>
That he may not eat my horses,<br/>
Nor destroy my herds of cattle,<br/>
Nor the flocks upon my pastures.”<br/>
Thereupon the skillful blacksmith<br/>
Forged a spear from magic metals,<br/>
Forged a lancet triple-pointed,<br/>
Not the longest, nor the shortest,<br/>
Forged the spear in wondrous beauty.<br/>
On one side a bear was sitting,<br/>
Sat a wolf upon the other,<br/>
On the blade an elk lay sleeping,<br/>
On the shaft a colt was running,<br/>
Near the hilt a roebuck bounding.<br/>
Snows had fallen from the heavens,<br/>
Made the flocks as white as ermine<br/>
Or the hare, in days of winter,<br/>
And the minstrel sang these measures:<br/>
“My desire impels me onward<br/>
To the Metsola-dominions,<br/>
To the homes of forest-maidens,<br/>
To the courts of the white virgins;<br/>
I will hasten to the forest,<br/>
Labor with the woodland-forces.<br/>
“Ruler of the Tapio-forests,<br/>
Make of me a conquering hero,<br/>
Help me clear these boundless woodlands.<br/>
O Mielikki, forest-hostess,<br/>
Tapio’s wife, thou fair Tellervo,<br/>
Call thy dogs and well enchain them,<br/>
Set in readiness thy hunters,<br/>
Let them wait within their kennels.<br/>
“Otso, thou O Forest-apple,<br/>
Bear of honey-paws and fur-robes,<br/>
Learn that Wainamoinen follows,<br/>
That the singer comes to meet thee;<br/>
Hide thy claws within thy mittens,<br/>
Let thy teeth remain in darkness,<br/>
That they may not harm the minstrel,<br/>
May be powerless in battle.<br/>
Mighty Otso, much beloved,<br/>
Honey-eater of the mountains,<br/>
Settle on the rocks in slumber,<br/>
On the turf and in thy caverns;<br/>
Let the aspen wave above thee,<br/>
Let the merry birch-tree rustle<br/>
O’er thy head for thy protection.<br/>
Rest in peace, thou much-loved Otso,<br/>
Turn about within thy thickets,<br/>
Like the partridge at her brooding,<br/>
In the spring-time like the wild-goose.”<br/>
When the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Heard his dog bark in the forest,<br/>
Heard his hunter’s call and echo,<br/>
He addressed the words that follow:<br/>
“Thought it was the cuckoo calling,<br/>
Thought the pretty bird was singing;<br/>
It was not the sacred cuckoo,<br/>
Not the liquid notes of songsters,<br/>
’Twas my dog that called and murmured,<br/>
’Twas the echo of my hunter<br/>
At the cavern-doors of Otso,<br/>
On the border of the woodlands.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Finds the mighty bear in waiting,<br/>
Lifts in joy the golden covers,<br/>
Well inspects his shining fur-robes;<br/>
Lifts his honey-paws in wonder,<br/>
Then addresses his Creator:<br/>
“Be thou praised, O mighty Ukko,<br/>
As thou givest me great Otso,<br/>
Givest me the Forest-apple,<br/>
Thanks be paid to thee unending.”<br/>
To the bear he spake these measures:<br/>
“Otso, thou my well beloved,<br/>
Honey-eater of the woodlands,<br/>
Let not anger swell thy bosom;<br/>
I have not the force to slay thee,<br/>
Willingly thy life thou givest<br/>
As a sacrifice to Northland.<br/>
Thou hast from the tree descended,<br/>
Glided from the aspen branches,<br/>
Slippery the trunks in autumn,<br/>
In the fog-days, smooth the branches.<br/>
Golden friend of fen and forest,<br/>
In thy fur-robes rich and beauteous,<br/>
Pride of woodlands, famous Light-foot,<br/>
Leave thy cold and cheerless dwelling,<br/>
Leave thy home within the alders,<br/>
Leave thy couch among the willows,<br/>
Hasten in thy purple stockings,<br/>
Hasten from thy walks restricted,<br/>
Come among the haunts of heroes,<br/>
Join thy friends in Kalevala.<br/>
We shall never treat thee evil,<br/>
Thou shalt dwell in peace and plenty,<br/>
Thou shalt feed on milk and honey,<br/>
Honey is the food of strangers.<br/>
Haste away from this thy covert,<br/>
From the couch of the unworthy,<br/>
To a couch beneath the rafters<br/>
Of Wainola’s ancient dwellings.<br/>
Haste thee onward o’er the snow-plain,<br/>
As a leaflet in the autumn;<br/>
Skip beneath these birchen branches,<br/>
As a squirrel in the summer,<br/>
As a cuckoo in the spring-time.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
The eternal wisdom-singer,<br/>
O’er the snow-fields hastened homeward,<br/>
Singing o’er the hills and mountains,<br/>
With his guest, the ancient Otso,<br/>
With his friend, the famous Light-foot,<br/>
With the Honey-paw of Northland.<br/>
Far away was heard the singing,<br/>
Heard the playing of the hunter,<br/>
Heard the songs of Wainamoinen;<br/>
All the people heard and wondered,<br/>
Men and maidens, young and aged,<br/>
From their cabins spake as follows:<br/>
“Hear the echoes from the woodlands,<br/>
Hear the bugle from the forest,<br/>
Hear the flute-notes of the songsters,<br/>
Hear the pipes of forest-maidens!”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and trusty,<br/>
Soon appears within the court-yard.<br/>
Rush the people from their cabins,<br/>
And the heroes ask these questions:<br/>
“Has a mine of gold been opened,<br/>
Hast thou found a vein of silver,<br/>
Precious jewels in thy pathway?<br/>
Does the forest yield her treasures,<br/>
Give to thee the Honey-eater?<br/>
Does the hostess of the woodlands,<br/>
Give to thee the lynx and adder,<br/>
Since thou comest home rejoicing,<br/>
Playing, singing, on thy snow-shoes?”<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Gave this answer to his people:<br/>
“For his songs I caught the adder,<br/>
Caught the serpent for his wisdom;<br/>
Therefore do I come rejoicing,<br/>
Singing, playing, on my snow-shoes.<br/>
Not the mountain lynx, nor serpent,<br/>
Comes, however, to our dwellings;<br/>
The Illustrious is coming,<br/>
Pride and beauty of the forest,<br/>
’Tis the Master comes among us,<br/>
Covered with his friendly fur-robe.<br/>
Welcome, Otso, welcome, Light-foot,<br/>
Welcome, Loved-one from the glenwood!<br/>
If the mountain guest is welcome,<br/>
Open wide the gates of entry;<br/>
If the bear is thought unworthy,<br/>
Bar the doors against the stranger.”<br/>
This the answer of the tribe-folk:<br/>
“We salute thee, mighty Otso,<br/>
Honey-paw, we bid thee welcome,<br/>
Welcome to our courts and cabins,<br/>
Welcome, Light-foot, to our tables<br/>
Decorated for thy coming!<br/>
We have wished for thee for ages,<br/>
Waiting since the days of childhood,<br/>
For the notes of Tapio’s bugle,<br/>
For the singing of the wood-nymphs,<br/>
For the coming of dear Otso,<br/>
For the forest gold and silver,<br/>
Waiting for the year of plenty,<br/>
Longing for it as for summer,<br/>
As the shoe waits for the snow-fields,<br/>
As the sledge for beaten highways,<br/>
As the maiden for her suitor,<br/>
And the wife her husband’s coming;<br/>
Sat at evening by the windows,<br/>
At the gates have, sat at morning,<br/>
Sat for ages at the portals,<br/>
Near the granaries in winter, Vanished,<br/>
Till the snow-fields warmed and<br/>
Till the sails unfurled in joyance,<br/>
Till the earth grew green and blossomed,<br/>
Thinking all the while as follows:<br/>
“Where is our beloved Otso,<br/>
Why delays our forest-treasure?<br/>
Has he gone to distant Ehstland,<br/>
To the upper glens of Suomi?”<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Whither shall I lead the stranger,<br/>
Whither take the golden Light-foot?<br/>
Shall I lead him to the garner,<br/>
To the house of straw conduct him?”<br/>
This the answer of his tribe-folk:<br/>
“To the dining-hall lead Otso,<br/>
Greatest hero of the Northland.<br/>
Famous Light-foot, Forest-apple,<br/>
Pride and glory of the woodlands,<br/>
Have no fear before these maidens,<br/>
Fear not curly-headed virgins,<br/>
Clad in silver-tinselled raiment<br/>
Maidens hasten to their chambers<br/>
When dear Otso joins their number,<br/>
When the hero comes among them.”<br/>
This the prayer of Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Grant, O Ukko, peace and plenty<br/>
Underneath these painted rafters,<br/>
In this ornamented dweling;<br/>
Thanks be paid to gracious Ukko!”<br/>
Spake again the ancient minstrel:<br/>
“Whither shall we lead dear Otso,<br/>
‘Whither take the fur-clad stranger?<br/>
This the answer of his people:<br/>
“Hither let the fur-robed Light-foot<br/>
Be saluted on his coming;<br/>
Let the Honey-paw be welcomed<br/>
To the hearth-stone of the penthouse,<br/>
Welcomed to the boiling caldrons,<br/>
That we may admire his fur-robe,<br/>
May behold his cloak with joyance.<br/>
Have no care, thou much-loved Otso,<br/>
Let not anger swell thy bosom<br/>
As thy coat we view with pleasure;<br/>
We thy fur shall never injure,<br/>
Shall not make it into garments<br/>
To protect unworthy people.”<br/>
Thereupon wise Wainamoinen<br/>
Pulled the sacred robe from Otso,<br/>
Spread it in the open court-yard,<br/>
Cut the members into fragments,<br/>
Laid them in the heating caldrons,<br/>
In the copper-bottomed vessels—<br/>
O’er the fire the crane was hanging,<br/>
On the crane were hooks of copper,<br/>
On the hooks the broiling-vessels<br/>
Filled with bear-steak for the feasting,<br/>
Seasoned with the salt of Dwina,<br/>
From the Saxon-land imported,<br/>
From the distant Dwina-waters,<br/>
From the salt-sea brought in shallops.<br/>
Ready is the feast of Otso;<br/>
From the fire are swung the kettles<br/>
On the crane of polished iron;<br/>
In the centers of the tables<br/>
Is the bear displayed in dishes,<br/>
Golden dishes, decorated;<br/>
Of the fir-tree and the linden<br/>
Were the tables newly fashioned;<br/>
Drinking cups were forged from copper,<br/>
Knives of gold and spoons of silver;<br/>
Filled the vessels to their borders<br/>
With the choicest bits of Light-foot,<br/>
Fragments of the Forest-apple.<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
“Ancient one with bosom golden,<br/>
Potent voice in Tapio’s councils<br/>
Metsola’s most lovely hostess,<br/>
Hostess of the glen and forest,<br/>
Hero-son of Tapiola,<br/>
Stalwart youth in cap of scarlet,<br/>
Tapio’s most beauteous virgin,<br/>
Fair Tellervo of the woodlands,<br/>
Metsola with all her people,<br/>
Come, and welcome, to the feasting,<br/>
To the marriage-feast of Otso!<br/>
All sufficient, the provisions,<br/>
Food to eat and drink abundant,<br/>
Plenty for the hosts assembled,<br/>
Plenty more to give the village.”<br/>
This the question of the people:<br/>
“Tell us of the birth of Otso!<br/>
Was he born within a manger,<br/>
Was he nurtured in the bath-room<br/>
Was his origin ignoble?”<br/>
This is Wainamoinen’s answer:<br/>
“Otso was not born a beggar,<br/>
Was not born among the rushes,<br/>
Was not cradled in a manger;<br/>
Honey-paw was born in ether,<br/>
In the regions of the Moon-land,<br/>
On the shoulders of Otava,<br/>
With the daughters of creation.<br/>
“Through the ether walked a maiden,<br/>
On the red rims of the cloudlets,<br/>
On the border of the heavens,<br/>
In her stockings purple-tinted,<br/>
In her golden-colored sandals.<br/>
In her hand she held a wool-box,<br/>
With a hair-box on her shoulder;<br/>
Threw the wool upon the ocean,<br/>
And the hair upon the rivers;<br/>
These are rocked by winds and waters,<br/>
Water-currents bear them onward,<br/>
Bear them to the sandy sea-shore,<br/>
Land them near the Woods of honey,<br/>
On an island forest-covered.<br/>
“Fair Mielikki, woodland hostess,<br/>
Tapio’s most cunning daughter,<br/>
Took the fragments from the sea-side,<br/>
Took the white wool from the waters,<br/>
Sewed the hair and wool together,<br/>
Laid the bundle in her basket,<br/>
Basket made from bark of birch-wood,<br/>
Bound with cords the magic bundle;<br/>
With the chains of gold she bound it<br/>
To the pine-tree’s topmost branches.<br/>
There she rocked the thing of magic,<br/>
Rocked to life the tender baby,<br/>
Mid the blossoms of the pine-tree,<br/>
On the fir-top set with needles;<br/>
Thus the young bear well was nurtured,<br/>
Thus was sacred Otso cradled<br/>
On the honey-tree of Northland,<br/>
In the middle of the forest.<br/>
“Sacred Otso grew and flourished,<br/>
Quickly grew with graceful movements,<br/>
Short of feet, with crooked ankles,<br/>
Wide of mouth and broad of forehead,<br/>
Short his nose, his fur-robe velvet;<br/>
But his claws were not well fashioned,<br/>
Neither were his teeth implanted.<br/>
Fair Mielikki, forest hostess,<br/>
Spake these words in meditation:<br/>
‘Claws I should be pleased to give him,<br/>
And with teeth endow the wonder,<br/>
Would he not abuse the favor.’<br/>
“Swore the bear a promise sacred,<br/>
On his knees before Mielikki,<br/>
Hostess of the glen and forest,<br/>
And before omniscient Ukko,<br/>
First and last of all creators,<br/>
That he would not harm the worthy,<br/>
Never do a deed of evil.<br/>
Then Mielikki, woodland hostess,<br/>
Wisest maid of Tapiola,<br/>
Sought for teeth and claws to give him,<br/>
From the stoutest mountain-ashes,<br/>
From the juniper and oak tree,<br/>
From the dry knots of the alder.<br/>
Teeth and claws of these were worthless,<br/>
Would not render goodly service.<br/>
“Grew a fir-tree on the mountain,<br/>
Grew a stately pine in Northland,<br/>
And the fir had silver branches,<br/>
Bearing golden cones abundant;<br/>
These the sylvan maiden gathered,<br/>
Teeth and claws of these she fashioned<br/>
In the jaws and feet of Otso,<br/>
Set them for the best of uses.<br/>
Then she freed her new-made creature,<br/>
Let the Light-foot walk and wander,<br/>
Let him lumber through the marshes,<br/>
Let him amble through the forest,<br/>
Roll upon the plains and pastures;<br/>
Taught him how to walk a hero,<br/>
How to move with graceful motion,<br/>
How to live in ease and pleasure,<br/>
How to rest in full contentment,<br/>
In the moors and in the marshes,<br/>
On the borders of the woodlands;<br/>
How unshod to walk in summer,<br/>
Stockingless to run in autumn;<br/>
How to rest and sleep in winter<br/>
In the clumps of alder-bushes<br/>
Underneath the sheltering fir-tree,<br/>
Underneath the pine’s protection,<br/>
Wrapped securely in his fur-robes,<br/>
With the juniper and willow.<br/>
This the origin of Otso,<br/>
Honey-eater of the Northlands,<br/>
Whence the sacred booty cometh.<br/>
Thus again the people questioned:<br/>
Why became the woods so gracious,<br/>
Why so generous and friendly?<br/>
Why is Tapio so humored,<br/>
That he gave his dearest treasure,<br/>
Gave to thee his Forest-apple,<br/>
Honey-eater of his kingdom?<br/>
Was he startled with thine arrows,<br/>
Frightened with the spear and broadsword?”<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
Gave this answer to the question:<br/>
“Filled with kindness was the forest,<br/>
Glen and woodland full of greetings,<br/>
Tapio showing greatest favor.<br/>
Fair Mielikki, forest hostess,<br/>
Metsola’s bewitching daughter,<br/>
Beauteous woodland maid, Tellervo,<br/>
Gladly led me on my journey,<br/>
Smoothed my pathway through the glen-wood.<br/>
Marked the trees upon the mountains,<br/>
Pointing me to Otso’s caverns,<br/>
To the Great Bear’s golden island.<br/>
“When my journeyings had ended,<br/>
When the bear had been discovered,<br/>
Had no need to launch my javelins,<br/>
Did not need to aim the arrow;<br/>
Otso tumbled in his vaulting,<br/>
Lost his balance in his cradle,<br/>
In the fir-tree where he slumbered;<br/>
Tore his breast upon the branches,<br/>
Freely gave his life to others.<br/>
“Mighty Otso, my beloved,<br/>
Thou my golden friend and hero,<br/>
Take thy fur-cap from thy forehead,<br/>
Lay aside thy teeth forever,<br/>
Hide thy fingers in the darkness,<br/>
Close thy mouth and still thine anger,<br/>
While thy sacred skull is breaking.<br/>
“Now I take the eyes of Otso,<br/>
Lest he lose the sense of seeing,<br/>
Lest their former powers shall weaken;<br/>
Though I take not all his members,<br/>
Not alone must these be taken.<br/>
“Now I take the ears of Otso,<br/>
Lest he lose the sense of hearing,<br/>
Lest their former powers shall weaken;<br/>
Though I take not all his members,<br/>
Not alone must these be taken.<br/>
“Now I take the nose of Otso,<br/>
Lest he lose the sense of smelling,<br/>
Lest its former powers shall weaken;<br/>
Though I take not all his members,<br/>
Not alone must this be taken.<br/>
“Now I take the tongue of Otso,<br/>
Lest he lose the sense of tasting<br/>
Lest its former powers shall weaken;<br/>
Though I take not all his members,<br/>
Not alone must this be taken.<br/>
“Now I take the brain of Otso,<br/>
Lest he lose the means of thinking,<br/>
Lest his consciousness should fail him,<br/>
Lest his former instincts weaken;<br/>
Though I take not all his members,<br/>
Not alone must this be taken.<br/>
“I will reckon him a hero,<br/>
That will count the teeth of Light-foot,<br/>
That will loosen Otso’s fingers<br/>
From their settings firmly fastened.”<br/>
None he finds with strength sufficient<br/>
To perform the task demanded.<br/>
Therefore ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Counts the teeth of sacred Otso;<br/>
Loosens all the claws of Light-foot,<br/>
With his fingers strong as copper,<br/>
Slips them from their firm foundations,<br/>
Speaking to the bear these measures:<br/>
“Otso, thou my Honey-eater,<br/>
Thou my Fur-ball of the woodlands,<br/>
Onward, onward, must thou journey<br/>
From thy low and lonely dwelling,<br/>
To the court-rooms of the village.<br/>
Go, my treasure, through the pathway<br/>
Near the herds of swine and cattle,<br/>
To the hill-tops forest covered,<br/>
To the high and rising mountains,<br/>
To the spruce-trees filled with needles,<br/>
To the branches of the pine-tree;<br/>
There remain, my Forest-apple,<br/>
Linger there in lasting slumber,<br/>
Where the silver bells are ringing,<br/>
To the pleasure of the shepherd.”<br/>
Thus beginning, and thus ending,<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Hastened from his emptied tables,<br/>
And the children thus addressed him:<br/>
“Whither hast thou led thy booty,<br/>
Where hast left thy Forest-apple,<br/>
Sacred Otso of the woodlands?<br/>
Hast thou left him on the iceberg,<br/>
Buried him upon the snow-field?<br/>
Hast thou sunk him in the quicksand,<br/>
Laid him low beneath the heather?”<br/>
Wainamoinen spake in answer:<br/>
“Have not left him on the iceberg,<br/>
Have not buried him in snow-fields;<br/>
There the dogs would soon devour him,<br/>
Birds of prey would feast upon him;<br/>
Have not hidden him in Swamp-land,<br/>
Have not buried him in heather;<br/>
There the worms would live upon him,<br/>
Insects feed upon his body.<br/>
Thither I have taken Otso,<br/>
To the summit of the Gold-hill,<br/>
To the copper-bearing mountain,<br/>
Laid him in his silken cradle<br/>
In the summit of a pine-tree,<br/>
Where the winds and sacred branches<br/>
Rock him to his lasting slumber,<br/>
To the pleasure of the hunter,<br/>
To the joy of man and hero.<br/>
To the east his lips are pointing,<br/>
While his eyes are northward looking;<br/>
But dear Otso looks not upward,<br/>
For the fierceness of the storm-winds<br/>
Would destroy his sense of vision.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Touched again his harp of joyance,<br/>
Sang again his songs enchanting,<br/>
To the pleasure of the evening,<br/>
To the joy of morn arising.<br/>
Spake the singer of Wainola:<br/>
“Light for me a torch of pine-wood,<br/>
For the darkness is appearing,<br/>
That my playing may be joyous<br/>
And my wisdom-songs find welcome.”<br/>
Then the ancient sage and singer,<br/>
Wise and worthy Wainamoinen,<br/>
Sweetly sang and played, and chanted,<br/>
Through the long and dreary evening,<br/>
Ending thus his incantation:<br/>
“Grant, O Ukko, my Creator,<br/>
That the people of Wainola<br/>
May enjoy another banquet<br/>
In the company of Light-foot;<br/>
Grant that we may long remember<br/>
Kalevala’s feast with Otso!<br/>
“Grant, O Ukko, my Creator,<br/>
That the signs may guide our footsteps,<br/>
That the notches in the pine-tree<br/>
May direct my faithful people<br/>
To the bear-dens of the woodlands;<br/>
That great Tapio’s sacred bugle<br/>
May resound through glen and forest;<br/>
That the wood-nymph’s call may echo,<br/>
May be heard in field and hamlet,<br/>
To the joy of all that listen!<br/>
Let great Tapio’s horn for ages<br/>
Ring throughout the fen and forest,<br/>
Through the hills and dales of Northland<br/>
O’er the meadows and the mountains,<br/>
To awaken song and gladness<br/>
In the forests of Wainola,<br/>
On the snowy plains of Suomi,<br/>
On the meads of Kalevala,<br/>
For the coming generations.”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap47"/>RUNE XLVII.<br/>
LOUHI STEALS SUN, MOON, AND FIRE.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Touched again his magic harp-strings,<br/>
Sang in miracles of concord,<br/>
Filled the north with joy and gladness.<br/>
Melodies arose to heaven,<br/>
Songs arose to Luna’s chambers,<br/>
Echoed through the Sun’s bright windows<br/>
And the Moon has left her station,<br/>
Drops and settles in the birch-tree;<br/>
And the Sun comes from his castle,<br/>
Settles in the fir-tree branches,<br/>
Comes to share the common pleasure,<br/>
Comes to listen to the singing,<br/>
To the harp of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Northland’s old and toothless wizard,<br/>
Makes the Sun and Moon her captives;<br/>
In her arms she takes fair Luna<br/>
From her cradle in the birch-tree,<br/>
Calls the Sun down from his station,<br/>
From the fir-tree’s bending branches,<br/>
Carries them to upper Northland,<br/>
To the darksome Sariola;<br/>
Hides the Moon, no more to glimmer,<br/>
In a rock of many colors;<br/>
Hides the Sun, to shine no longer,<br/>
In the iron-banded mountain;<br/>
Thereupon these words she utters:<br/>
“Moon of gold and Sun of silver,<br/>
Hide your faces in the caverns<br/>
Of Pohyola’s dismal mountain;<br/>
Shine no more to gladden Northland,<br/>
Till I come to give ye freedom,<br/>
Drawn by coursers nine in number,<br/>
Sable coursers of one mother!”<br/>
When the golden Moon had vanished,<br/>
And the silver Sun had hidden<br/>
In the iron-banded caverns,<br/>
Louhi stole the fire from Northland,<br/>
From the regions of Wainola,<br/>
Left the mansions cold and cheerless,<br/>
And the cabins full of darkness.<br/>
Night was king and reigned unbroken,<br/>
Darkness ruled in Kalevala,<br/>
Darkness in the home of Ukko.<br/>
Hard to live without the moonlight,<br/>
Harder still without the sunshine;<br/>
Ukko’s life is dark and dismal,<br/>
When the Sun and Moon desert him.<br/>
Ukko, first of all creators,<br/>
Lived in wonder at the darkness;<br/>
Long reflected, well considered,<br/>
Why this miracle in heaven,<br/>
What this accident in nature<br/>
To the Moon upon her journey;<br/>
Why the Sun no more is shining,<br/>
Why has disappeared the moonlight.<br/>
Then great Ukko walked the heavens,<br/>
To the border of the cloudlets,<br/>
In his purple-colored vestments,<br/>
In his silver-tinselled sandals,<br/>
Seeking for the golden moonlight,<br/>
Looking for the silver sunshine.<br/>
Lightning Ukko struck in darkness<br/>
From the edges of his fire-sword;<br/>
Shot the flames in all directions,<br/>
From his blade of golden color,<br/>
Into heaven’s upper spaces,<br/>
Into Ether’s starry pastures.<br/>
When a little fire had kindled,<br/>
Ukko hid it in the cloud-space,<br/>
In a box of gold and silver,<br/>
In a case adorned with silver,<br/>
Gave it to the ether-maidens,<br/>
Called a virgin then to rock it,<br/>
That it might become a new-moon,<br/>
That a second sun might follow.<br/>
On the long-cloud rocked the virgin,<br/>
On the blue-edge of the ether,<br/>
Rocked the fire of the Creator,<br/>
In her copper-colored cradle,<br/>
With her ribbons silver-studded.<br/>
Lowly bend the bands of silver,<br/>
Loud the golden cradle echoes,<br/>
And the clouds of Northland thunder,<br/>
Low descends the dome of heaven,<br/>
At the rocking of the lightning,<br/>
Rocking of the fire of Ukko.<br/>
Thus the flame was gently cradled<br/>
By the virgin of the ether.<br/>
Long the fair and faithful maiden<br/>
Stroked the Fire-child with her fingers,<br/>
Tended it with care and pleasure,<br/>
Till in an unguarded moment<br/>
It escaped the Ether-virgin,<br/>
Slipped the hands of her that nursed it.<br/>
Quick the heavens are burst asunder,<br/>
Quick the vault of Ukko opens,<br/>
Downward drops the wayward Fire-child,<br/>
Downward quick the red-ball rushes,<br/>
Shoots across the arch of heaven,<br/>
Hisses through the startled cloudlets,<br/>
Flashes through the troubled welkin,<br/>
Through nine starry vaults of ether.<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Spake and these the words he uttered:<br/>
“Blacksmith brother, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Let us haste and look together,<br/>
What the kind of fire that falleth,<br/>
What the form of light that shineth<br/>
From the upper vault of heaven,<br/>
From the lower earth and ocean.<br/>
Has a second moon arisen,<br/>
Can it be a ball of sunlight?<br/>
Thereupon the heroes wandered,<br/>
Onward journeyed and reflected,<br/>
How to gain the spot illumined,<br/>
How to find the sacred Fire-child.<br/>
Came a river rushing by them,<br/>
Broad and stately as an ocean.<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
There began to build a vessel,<br/>
Build a boat to cross the river.<br/>
With the aid of Ilmarinen,<br/>
From the oak he cut the row-locks,<br/>
From the pine the oars be fashioned,<br/>
From the aspen shapes the rudder.<br/>
When the vessel they had finished,<br/>
Quick they rolled it to the current,<br/>
Hard they rowed and ever forward,<br/>
On the Nawa-stream and waters,<br/>
At the head of Nawa-river.<br/>
Ilmatar, the ether-daughter,<br/>
Foremost daughter of creation,<br/>
Came to meet them on their journey,<br/>
Thus addressed the coming strangers:<br/>
“Who are ye of Northland heroes,<br/>
Rowing on the Nawa-waters?”<br/>
Wainamoinen gave this answer:<br/>
“This the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
I the ancient Wainamoinen.<br/>
Tell us now thy name and station,<br/>
Whither going, whence thou comest,<br/>
Where thy tribe-folk live and linger?<br/>
Spake the daughter of the Ether:<br/>
“I the oldest of the women,<br/>
Am the first of Ether’s daughters,<br/>
Am the first of ancient mothers;<br/>
Seven times have I been wedded.<br/>
To the heroes of creation.<br/>
Whither do ye strangers journey?<br/>
Answered thus old Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Fire has left Wainola’s hearth-stones,<br/>
Light has disappeared from Northland;<br/>
Have been sitting long in darkness,<br/>
Cold and darkness our companions;<br/>
Now we journey to discover<br/>
What the fire that fell from heaven,<br/>
Falling from the cloud’s red lining,<br/>
To the deeps of earth and ocean.”<br/>
Ilmatar returned this answer:<br/>
“Hard the flame is to discover,<br/>
Hard indeed to find the Fire-child;<br/>
Has committed many mischiefs,<br/>
Nothing good has he accomplished;<br/>
Quick the fire-ball fell from ether,<br/>
From the red rims of the cloudlets,<br/>
From the plains of the Creator,<br/>
Through the ever-moving heavens,<br/>
Through the purple ether-spaces,<br/>
Through the blackened flues of Turi,<br/>
To Palwoinen’s rooms uncovered.<br/>
When the fire had reached the chambers<br/>
Of Palwoinen, son of evil,<br/>
He began his wicked workings,<br/>
He engaged in lawless actions,<br/>
Raged against the blushing maidens,<br/>
Fired the youth to evil conduct,<br/>
Singed the beards of men and heroes.<br/>
“Where the mother nursed her baby,<br/>
In the cold and cheerless cradle,<br/>
Thither flew the wicked Fire-child,<br/>
There to perpetrate some mischief;<br/>
In the cradle burned the infant,<br/>
By the infant burned the mother,<br/>
That the babe might visit Mana,<br/>
In the kingdom of Tuoni;<br/>
Said the child was born for dying,<br/>
Only destined for destruction,<br/>
Through the tortures of the Fire-child.<br/>
Greater knowledge had the mother,<br/>
Did not journey to Manala,<br/>
Knew the word to check the red-flame,<br/>
How to banish the intruder<br/>
Through the eyelet of a needle,<br/>
Through the death-hole of the hatchet.”<br/>
Then the ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Questioned Ilmatar as follows:<br/>
“Whither did the Fire-child wander,<br/>
Whither did the red-flame hasten,<br/>
From the border-fields of Turi,<br/>
To the woods, or to the waters?<br/>
Straightway Ilmatar thus answers:<br/>
“When the fire had fled from Turi,<br/>
From the castles of Palwoinen,<br/>
Through the eyelet of the needle,<br/>
Through the death-hole of the hatchet,<br/>
First it burned the fields, and forests,<br/>
Burned the lowlands, and the heather;<br/>
Then it sought the mighty waters,<br/>
Sought the Alue-sea and river,<br/>
And the waters hissed and sputtered<br/>
In their anger at the Fire-child,<br/>
Fiery red the boiling Alue!<br/>
“Three times in the nights of, summer,<br/>
Nine times in the nights of autumn,<br/>
Boil the waters to the tree-tops,<br/>
Roll and tumble to the mountain,<br/>
Through the red-ball’s force and fury;<br/>
Hurls the pike upon the pastures,<br/>
To the mountain-cliffs, the salmon,<br/>
Where the ocean-dwellers wonder,<br/>
Long reflect and well consider<br/>
How to still the angry waters.<br/>
Wept the salmon for his grotto,<br/>
Mourned the whiting for his cavern,<br/>
And the lake-trout for his dwelling,<br/>
Quick the crook-necked salmon darted,<br/>
Tried to catch the fire-intruder,<br/>
But the red-ball quick escaped him;<br/>
Darted then the daring whiting,<br/>
Swallowed quick the wicked Fire-child,<br/>
Swallowed quick the flame of evil.<br/>
Quiet grow the Alue-waters,<br/>
Slowly settle to their shore-lines,<br/>
To their long-accustomed places,<br/>
In the long and dismal evening.<br/>
“Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
When the whiting grow affrighted,<br/>
Fear befel the fire-devourer;<br/>
Burning pain and writhing tortures<br/>
Seized the eater of the Fire-child;<br/>
Swam the fish in all directions,<br/>
Called, and moaned, and swam, and circled,<br/>
Swam one day, and then a second,<br/>
Swam the third from morn till even;<br/>
Swam she to the whiting-island,<br/>
To the caverns of the salmon,<br/>
Where a hundred islands cluster;<br/>
And the islands there assembled<br/>
Thus addressed the fire-devourer:<br/>
‘There is none within these waters,<br/>
In this narrow Alue-lakelet,<br/>
That will eat the fated Fire-fish<br/>
That will swallow thee in trouble,<br/>
In thine agonies and torture<br/>
From the Fire-child thou hast eaten.’<br/>
“Hearing this a trout forth darting,<br/>
Swallowed quick as light the whiting,<br/>
Quickly ate the fire-devourer.<br/>
Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
When the trout became affrighted,<br/>
Fear befel the whiting-eater;<br/>
Burning pain and writhing torment<br/>
Seized the eater of the Fire-fish.<br/>
Swam the trout in all directions,<br/>
Called, and moaned, and swam, and circled,<br/>
Swam one day, and then a second,<br/>
Swain the third from morn till even;<br/>
Swam she to the salmon-island,<br/>
Swam she to the whiting-grottoes,<br/>
Where a thousand islands cluster,<br/>
And the islands there assembled<br/>
Thus addressed the tortured lake-trout:<br/>
‘There is none within this river,<br/>
In these narrow Alue-waters,<br/>
That will eat the wicked Fire-fish,<br/>
That will swallow thee in trouble,<br/>
In thine agonies and tortures,<br/>
From the Fire-fish thou hast eaten.”<br/>
Hearing this the gray-pike darted,<br/>
Swallowed quick as light the lake-trout,<br/>
Quickly ate the tortured Fire-fish.<br/>
“Time had gone but little distance,<br/>
When the gray-pike grew affrighted,<br/>
Fear befel the lake-trout-eater;<br/>
Burning pain and writhing torment<br/>
Seized the reckless trout-devourer;<br/>
Swam the pike in all directions,<br/>
Called, and moaned, and swam, and circled,<br/>
Swam one day, and then a second,<br/>
Swam the third from morn till even,<br/>
To the cave of ocean-swallows,<br/>
To the sand-hills of the sea-gull,<br/>
Where a hundred islands cluster;<br/>
And the islands there assembled<br/>
Thus addressed the fire-devourer:<br/>
‘There is none within this lakelet,<br/>
In these narrow Alue-waters,<br/>
That will eat the fated Fire-fish,<br/>
That will swallow thee in trouble,<br/>
In thine agonies and tortures,<br/>
From the Fire-fish thou hast eaten.’”<br/>
Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,<br/>
With the aid of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Weaves with skill a mighty fish-net<br/>
From the juniper and sea-grass;<br/>
Dyes the net with alder-water,<br/>
Ties it well with thongs of willow.<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Called the maidens to the fish-net,<br/>
And the sisters came as bidden.<br/>
With the netting rowed they onward,<br/>
Rowed they to the hundred islands,<br/>
To the grottoes of the salmon,<br/>
To the caverns of the whiting,<br/>
To the reeds of sable color,<br/>
Where the gray-pike rests and watches.<br/>
On they hasten to the fishing,<br/>
Drag the net in all directions,<br/>
Drag it lengthwise, sidewise, crosswise,<br/>
And diagonally zigzag;<br/>
But they did not catch the Fire-fish.<br/>
Then the brothers went a-fishing,<br/>
Dragged the net in all directions,<br/>
Backwards, forwards, lengthwise, sidewise,<br/>
Through the homes of ocean-dwellers,<br/>
Through the grottoes of the salmon,<br/>
Through the dwellings of the whiting,<br/>
Through the reed-beds of the lake-trout,<br/>
Where the gray-pike lies in ambush;<br/>
But the fated Fire-fish came not,<br/>
Came not from the lake’s abysses,<br/>
Came not from the Alue-waters.<br/>
Little fish could not be captured<br/>
In the large nets of the masters;<br/>
Murmured then the deep-sea-dwellers,<br/>
Spake the salmon to the lake-trout,<br/>
And the lake-trout to the whiting,<br/>
And the whiting to the gray-pike:<br/>
Have the heroes of Wainola<br/>
Died, or have they all departed<br/>
From these fertile shores and waters?<br/>
Where then are the ancient weavers,<br/>
Weavers of the nets of flax-thread,<br/>
Those that frighten us with fish-poles,<br/>
Drag us from our homes unwilling?”<br/>
Hearing this wise Wainamoinen<br/>
Answered thus the deep-sea-dwellers:<br/>
“Neither have Wainola’s heroes<br/>
Died, nor have they all departed<br/>
From these fertile shores and waters,<br/>
Two are born where one has perished;<br/>
Longer poles and finer fish-nets<br/>
Have the sons of Kalevala!”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap48"/>RUNE XLVIII.<br/>
CAPTURE OF THE FIRE-FISH.</h2>
<p>Wainamoinen, the enchanter,<br/>
The eternal wisdom-singer,<br/>
Long reflected, well considered,<br/>
How to weave the net of flax-yarn,<br/>
Weave the fish-net of the fathers.<br/>
Spake the minstrel of Wainola:<br/>
“Who will plow the field and fallow,<br/>
Sow the flax, and spin the flax-threads,<br/>
That I may prepare the fish-net,<br/>
Wherewith I may catch the Fire-pike,<br/>
May secure the thing of evil?”<br/>
Soon they found a fertile island,<br/>
Found the fallow soil befitting,<br/>
On the border of the heather,<br/>
And between two stately oak-trees.<br/>
They prepared the soil for sowing.<br/>
Searching everywhere for flax-seed,<br/>
Found it in Tuoni’s kingdom,<br/>
In the keeping of an insect.<br/>
Then they found a pile of ashes,<br/>
Where the fire had burned a vessel;<br/>
In the ashes sowed the seedlings<br/>
Near the Alue-lake and border,<br/>
In the rich and loamy fallow.<br/>
There the seed took root and flourished,<br/>
Quickly grew to great proportions,<br/>
In a single night in summer.<br/>
Thus the flax was sowed at evening,<br/>
Placed within the earth by moonlight;<br/>
Quick it grew, and quickly ripened,<br/>
Quick Wainola’s heroes pulled it,<br/>
Quick they broke it on the hackles,<br/>
Hastened with it to the waters,<br/>
Dipped it in the lake and washed it;<br/>
Quickly brought it borne and dried it.<br/>
Quickly broke, and combed, and smoothed it,<br/>
Brushed it well at early morning,<br/>
Laid it into laps for spinning<br/>
Quick the maidens twirl the spindles,<br/>
Spin the flaxen threads for weaving,<br/>
In a single night in summer.<br/>
Quick the sisters wind and reel it,<br/>
Make it ready for the needle.<br/>
Brothers weave it into fish-nets,<br/>
And the fathers twist the cordage,<br/>
While the mothers knit the meshes,<br/>
Rapidly the mesh-stick circles;<br/>
Soon the fish-net is completed,<br/>
In a single night in summer.<br/>
As the magic net is finished,<br/>
And in length a hundred fathoms,<br/>
On the rim three hundred fathoms.<br/>
Rounded stones are fastened to it,<br/>
Joined thereto are seven float-boards.<br/>
Now the young men take the fish-net,<br/>
And the old men cheer them onward,<br/>
Wish them good-luck at their fishing.<br/>
Long they row and drag the flax-seine,<br/>
Here and there the net is lowered;<br/>
Now they drag it lengthwise, sidewise,<br/>
Drag it through the slimy reed-beds;<br/>
But they do not catch the Fire-pike,<br/>
Only smelts, and luckless red-fish,<br/>
Little fish of little value.<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Let us go ourselves a-fishing,<br/>
Let us catch the fish of evil!”<br/>
To the fishing went the brothers,<br/>
Magic heroes of the Northland,<br/>
Pulled the fish-net through the waters,<br/>
Toward an island in the deep-sea<br/>
Then they turn and drag the fish-net<br/>
Toward a meadow jutting seaward;<br/>
Now they drag it toward Wainola,<br/>
Draw it lengthwise, sidewise, crosswise,<br/>
Catching fish of every species,<br/>
salmon, trout, and pike, and whiting,<br/>
Do not catch the evil Fire-fish.<br/>
Then the master, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Made additions to its borders,<br/>
Made it many fathoms wider,<br/>
And a hundred fathoms longer,<br/>
Then these words the hero uttered<br/>
“Famous blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Let us go again a-fishing,<br/>
Row again the magic fish-net,<br/>
Drag it well through all the waters,<br/>
That we may obtain the Fire-pike!”<br/>
Thereupon the Northland heroes<br/>
Go a second time a-fishing,<br/>
Drag their nets across the rivers,<br/>
Lakelets, seas, and bays, and inlets,<br/>
Catching fish of many species,<br/>
But the Fire-fish is not taken.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient singer,<br/>
Long reflecting, spake these measures:<br/>
“Dear Wellamo, water-hostess,<br/>
Ancient mother with the reed-breast,<br/>
Come, exchange thy water-raiment,<br/>
Change thy coat of reeds and rushes<br/>
For the garments I shall give thee,<br/>
Light sea-foam, thine inner vesture,<br/>
And thine outer, moss and sea-grass,<br/>
Fashioned by the wind’s fair daughters,<br/>
Woven by the flood’s sweet maidens;<br/>
I will give thee linen vestments<br/>
Spun from flax of softest fiber,<br/>
Woven by the Moon’s white virgins,<br/>
Fashioned by the Sun’s bright daughters<br/>
Fitting raiment for Wellamo!<br/>
“Ahto, king of all the waters,<br/>
Ruler of a thousand grottoes,<br/>
Take a pole of seven fathoms,<br/>
Search with this the deepest waters,<br/>
Rummage well the lowest bottoms;<br/>
Stir up all the reeds and sea-weeds,<br/>
Hither drive a school of gray-pike,<br/>
Drive them to our magic fish-net,<br/>
From the haunts in pike abounding,<br/>
From the caverns, and the trout-holes,<br/>
From the whirlpools of the deep-sea,<br/>
From the bottomless abysses,<br/>
Where the sunshine never enters,<br/>
Where the moonlight never visits,<br/>
And the sands are never troubled.”<br/>
Rose a pigmy from the waters,<br/>
From the floods a little hero,<br/>
Riding on a rolling billow,<br/>
And the pigmy spake these measures:<br/>
“Dost thou wish a worthy helper,<br/>
One to use the pole and frighten<br/>
Pike and salmon to thy fish-nets?”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and faithful,<br/>
Answered thus the lake-born hero:<br/>
“Yea, we need a worthy helper,<br/>
One to hold the pole, and frighten<br/>
Pike and salmon to our fish-nets.”<br/>
Thereupon the water-pigmy<br/>
Cut a linden from the border,<br/>
Spake these words to Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Shall I scare with all my powers,<br/>
With the forces of my being,<br/>
As thou needest shall I scare them?”<br/>
Spake the minstrel, Wainamoinen:<br/>
“If thou scarest as is needed,<br/>
Thou wilt scare with all thy forces,<br/>
With the strength of thy dominions.”<br/>
Then began the pigmy-hero,<br/>
To affright the deep-sea-dwellers;<br/>
Drove the fish in countless numbers<br/>
To the net of the magicians.<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Drew his net along the waters,<br/>
Drew it with his ropes of flax-thread,<br/>
Spake these words of magic import:<br/>
“Come ye fish of Northland waters<br/>
To the regions of my fish-net,<br/>
As my hundred meshes lower.”<br/>
Then the net was drawn and fastened,<br/>
Many were the gray-pike taken<br/>
By the master and magician.<br/>
Wainamoinen, happy-hearted,<br/>
Hastened to a neighboring island,<br/>
To a blue-point in the waters,<br/>
Near a red-bridge on the headland;<br/>
Landed there his draught of fishes,<br/>
Cast the pike upon the sea-shore,<br/>
And the Fire-pike was among them,<br/>
Cast the others to the waters.<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“May I touch thee with my fingers,<br/>
Using not my gloves of iron,<br/>
Using not my blue-stone mittens?<br/>
This the Sun-child hears and answers:<br/>
“I should like to carve the Fire-fish,<br/>
I should like this pike to handle,<br/>
If I had the knife of good-luck.”<br/>
Quick a knife falls from the heavens,<br/>
From the clouds a magic fish-knife,<br/>
Silver-edged and golden-headed,<br/>
To the girdle of the Sun-child;<br/>
Quick he grasps the copper handle,<br/>
Quick the hero carves the Fire-pike,<br/>
Finds therein the tortured lake-trout;<br/>
Carves the lake-trout thus discovered.<br/>
Finds therein the fated whiting;<br/>
Carves the whiting, finds a blue-ball<br/>
In the third cave of his body.<br/>
He, the blue-ball quick unwinding,<br/>
Finds within a ball of scarlet;<br/>
Carefully removes the cover,<br/>
Finds the ball of fire within it,<br/>
Finds the flame from heaven fallen,<br/>
From the heights of the seventh heaven,<br/>
Through nine regions of the ether.<br/>
Wainamoinen long reflected<br/>
How to get the magic fire-ball<br/>
To Wainola’s fireless hearth-stones,<br/>
To his cold and cheerless dwellings.<br/>
Quick he snatched the fire of heaven<br/>
From the fingers of the Sun-child.<br/>
Wainamoinen’s beard it singes,<br/>
Burns the brow of Ilmarinen,<br/>
Burns the fingers of the blacksmith.<br/>
Rolling forth it hastens westward,<br/>
Hastens to the Alue shore-lines,<br/>
Burns the juniper and alder,<br/>
Burns the arid heath and meadow,<br/>
Rises to the lofty linden,<br/>
Burns the firs upon the mountains;<br/>
Hastens onward, onward, onward,<br/>
Burns the islands of the Northland,<br/>
Burns the Sawa fields and forests,<br/>
Burns the dry lands of Karyala.<br/>
Straightway ancient Wainamoinen<br/>
Hastens through the fields and fenlands,<br/>
Tracks the ranger to the glen-wood,<br/>
Finds the Fire-child in an elm-tree,<br/>
Sleeping in a bed of fungus.<br/>
Thereupon wise Wainamoinen<br/>
Wakes the child and speaks these measures:<br/>
“Wicked fire that God created,<br/>
Flame of Ukko from the heavens,<br/>
Thou hast gone in vain to sea-caves,<br/>
To the lakes without a reason;<br/>
Better go thou to my village,<br/>
To the hearth-stones of my people;<br/>
Hide thyself within my chimneys,<br/>
In mine ashes sleep and linger.<br/>
In the day-time I will use thee<br/>
To devour the blocks of birch-wood;<br/>
In the evening I will hide thee<br/>
Underneath the golden circle.”<br/>
Then he took the willing Panu,<br/>
Took the willing fire of Ukko,<br/>
Laid it in a box of tinder,<br/>
In the punk-wood of a birch-tree,<br/>
In a vessel forged from copper;<br/>
Carried it with care and pleasure<br/>
To the fog-point in the waters,<br/>
To the island forest covered.<br/>
Thus returned the fire to Northland,<br/>
To the chambers of Wainola,<br/>
To the hearths of Kalevala.<br/>
Ilmarinen, famous blacksmith,<br/>
Hastened to the deep-sea’s margin,<br/>
Sat upon the rock of torture,<br/>
Feeling pain the flame had given,<br/>
Laved his wounds with briny water,<br/>
Thus to still the Fire-child’s fury,<br/>
Thus to end his persecutions.<br/>
Long reflecting, Ilmarinen<br/>
Thus addressed the flame of Ukko:<br/>
“Evil Panu from the heavens,<br/>
Wicked son of God from ether,<br/>
Tell me what has made thee angry,<br/>
Made thee burn my weary members,<br/>
Burn my beard, and face, and fingers,<br/>
Made me suffer death-land tortures?<br/>
Spake again young Ilmarinen:<br/>
“How can I wild Panu conquer,<br/>
How shall I control his conduct,<br/>
Make him end his evil doings?<br/>
Come, thou daughter from Pohyola,<br/>
Come, white virgin of the hoar-frost,<br/>
Come on shoes of ice from Lapland,<br/>
Icicles upon thy garments,<br/>
In one band a cup of white-frost,<br/>
In the other hand an ice-spoon;<br/>
Sprinkle snow upon my members,<br/>
Where the Fire-child has been resting,<br/>
Let the hoar-frost fall and settle.<br/>
“Should this prayer be unavailing,<br/>
Come, thou son of Sariola,<br/>
Come, thou child of Frost from Pohya,<br/>
Come, thou Long-man from the ice-plains,<br/>
Of the height of stately pine-trees,<br/>
Slender as the trunks of lindens,<br/>
On thy hands the gloves of Hoar-frost,<br/>
Cap of ice upon thy forehead,<br/>
On thy waist a white-frost girdle;<br/>
Bring the ice-dust from Pohyola,<br/>
From the cold and sunless village.<br/>
Rain is crystallized in Northland,<br/>
Ice in Pohya is abundant,<br/>
Lakes of ice and ice-bound rivers,<br/>
Frozen smooth, the sea of ether.<br/>
Bounds the hare in frosted fur-robe,<br/>
Climbs the bear in icy raiment,<br/>
Ambles o’er the snowy mountains.<br/>
Swans of frost descend the rivers,<br/>
Ducks of ice in countless numbers<br/>
Swim upon thy freezing waters,<br/>
Near the cataract and whirlpool.<br/>
Bring me frost upon thy snow-sledge,<br/>
Snow and ice in great abundance,<br/>
From the summit of the wild-top,<br/>
From the borders of the mountains.<br/>
With thine ice, and snow, and hoar-frost<br/>
Cover well mine injured members<br/>
Where wild Panu has been resting,<br/>
Where the child of Fire has lingered.<br/>
“Should this call be ineffective,<br/>
Ukko, God of love and mercy,<br/>
First and last of the creators,<br/>
From the east send forth a snow-cloud,<br/>
From the west despatch a second,<br/>
Join their edges well together,<br/>
Let there be no vacant places,<br/>
Let these clouds bring snow and<br/>
Lay the healing balm of Ukko<br/>
On my burning, tortured tissues,<br/>
Where wild Panu has been resting.”<br/>
Thus the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
Stills the pains by fire engendered,<br/>
Stills the agonies and tortures<br/>
Brought him by the child of evil,<br/>
Brought him by the wicked Panu.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap49"/>RUNE XLIX.<br/>
RESTORATION OF THE SUN AND MOON.</h2>
<p>Thus has Fire returned to Northland<br/>
But the gold Moon is not shining,<br/>
Neither gleams the silver sunlight<br/>
In the chambers of Wainola,<br/>
On the plains of Kalevala.<br/>
On the crops the white-frost settled,<br/>
And the cattle died of hunger,<br/>
Even birds grew sick and perished.<br/>
Men and maidens, faint and famished,<br/>
Perished in the cold and darkness,<br/>
From the absence of the sunshine,<br/>
From the absence of the moonlight.<br/>
Knew the pike his holes and hollows,<br/>
And the eagle knew his highway,<br/>
Knew the winds the times for sailing;<br/>
But the wise men of the Northland<br/>
Could not know the dawn of morning,<br/>
On the fog-point in the ocean,<br/>
On the islands forest-covered.<br/>
Young and aged talked and wondered,<br/>
Well reflected, long debated,<br/>
How to live without the moonlight,<br/>
Live without the silver sunshine,<br/>
In the cold and cheerless Northland,<br/>
In the homes of Kalevala.<br/>
Long conjectured all the maidens,<br/>
Orphans asked the wise for counsel.<br/>
Spake a maid to Ilmarinen,<br/>
Running to the blacksmith’s furnace:<br/>
“Rise, O artist, from thy slumbers,<br/>
Hasten from thy couch unworthy;<br/>
Forge from gold the Moon for Northland,<br/>
Forge anew the Sun from silver<br/>
Cannot live without the moonlight,<br/>
Nor without the silver sunshine!”<br/>
From his couch arose the artist,<br/>
From his couch of stone, the blacksmith,<br/>
And began his work of forging,<br/>
Forging Sun and Moon for Northland.<br/>
Came the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
In the doorway sat and lingered,<br/>
Spake, these Words to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Blacksmith, my beloved brother,<br/>
Thou the only metal-worker,<br/>
Tell me why thy magic hammer<br/>
Falls so heavy on thine anvil?”<br/>
Spake the youthful Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Moon of gold and Sun of silver,<br/>
I am forging for Wainola;<br/>
I shall swing them into ether,<br/>
Plant them in the starry heavens.”<br/>
Spake the wise, old Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Senseless blacksmith of the ages,<br/>
Vainly dost thou swing thy hammer,<br/>
Vainly rings thy mighty anvil;<br/>
Silver will not gleam as sunshine,<br/>
Not of gold is born the moonlight!”<br/>
Ilmarinen, little heeding,<br/>
Ceases not to ply his hammer,<br/>
Sun and Moon the artist forges,<br/>
Wings the Moon of Magic upward,<br/>
Hurls it to the pine-tree branches;<br/>
Does not shine without her master.<br/>
Then the silver Sun he stations<br/>
In an elm-tree on the mountain.<br/>
From his forehead drip the sweat-drops,<br/>
Perspiration from his fingers,<br/>
Through his labors at the anvil<br/>
While the Sun and Moon were forging;<br/>
But the Sun shone not at morning<br/>
From his station in the elm-tree;<br/>
And the Moon shone not at evening<br/>
From the pine-tree’s topmost branches.<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Let the Fates be now consulted,<br/>
And the oracles examined;<br/>
Only thus may we discover<br/>
Where the Sun and Moon lie hidden.”<br/>
Thereupon old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Only wise and true magician,<br/>
Cut three chips from trunks of alder,<br/>
Laid the chips in magic order,<br/>
Touched and turned them with his fingers,<br/>
Spake these words of master-magic:<br/>
“Of my Maker seek I knowledge,<br/>
Ask in hope and faith the answer<br/>
From the great magician, Ukko:<br/>
Tongue of alder, tell me truly,<br/>
Symbol of the great Creator,<br/>
Where the Sun and Moon are sleeping;<br/>
For the Moon shines not in season,<br/>
Nor appears the Sun at midday,<br/>
From their stations in the sky-vault.<br/>
Speak the truth, O magic alder,<br/>
Speak not words of man, nor hero,<br/>
Hither bring but truthful measures.<br/>
Let us form a sacred compact:<br/>
If thou speakest me a falsehood,<br/>
I will hurl thee to Manala,<br/>
Let the nether fires consume thee,<br/>
That thine evil signs may perish.”<br/>
Thereupon the alder answered,<br/>
Spake these words of truthful import:<br/>
“Verily the Sun lies hidden<br/>
And the golden Moon is sleeping<br/>
In the stone-berg of Pohyola,<br/>
In the copper-bearing mountain.”<br/>
These the words of Wainamoinen:<br/>
“I shall go at once to Northland,<br/>
To the cold and dark Pohyola,<br/>
Bring the Sun and Moon to gladden<br/>
All Wainola’s fields and forests.”<br/>
Forth he hastens on his journey,<br/>
To the dismal Sariola,<br/>
To the Northland cold and dreary;<br/>
Travels one day, then a second,<br/>
So the third from morn till evening,<br/>
When appear the gates of Pohya,<br/>
With her snow-clad hills and mountains.<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
At the river of Pohyola,<br/>
Loudly calls the ferry-maiden:<br/>
Bring a boat, O Pohya-daughter,<br/>
Bring a strong and trusty vessel,<br/>
Row me o’er these chilling waters,<br/>
O’er this rough and rapid river!”<br/>
But the Ferry-maiden heard not,<br/>
Did not listen to his calling.<br/>
Thereupon old Wainamoinen,<br/>
Laid a pile of well-dried brush-wood,<br/>
Knots and needles of the fir-tree,<br/>
Made a fire beside the river,<br/>
Sent the black smoke into heaven<br/>
Curling to the home of Ukko.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of the Northland,<br/>
Hastened to her chamber window,<br/>
Looked upon the bay and river,<br/>
Spake these words to her attendants:<br/>
“Why the fire across the river<br/>
Where the current meets the deep-sea,<br/>
Smaller than the fires of foemen,<br/>
Larger than the flames of hunters?”<br/>
Thereupon a Pohyalander<br/>
Hastened from the court of Louhi<br/>
That the cause he might discover,’<br/>
Bring the sought-for information<br/>
To the hostess of Pohyola;<br/>
Saw upon the river-border<br/>
Some great hero from Wainola.<br/>
Wainamoinen saw the stranger,<br/>
Called again in tones of thunder:<br/>
“Bring a skiff; thou son of Northland,<br/>
For the minstrel, Wainamoinen!<br/>
Thus the Pohyalander answered:<br/>
“Here no skiffs are lying idle,<br/>
Row thyself across the waters,<br/>
Use thine arms, and feet, and fingers,<br/>
To propel thee o’er the river,<br/>
O’er the sacred stream of Pohya.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, long reflecting,<br/>
Bravely thus soliloquizes:<br/>
“I will change my form and features,<br/>
Will assume a second body,<br/>
Neither man, nor ancient minstrel,<br/>
Master of the Northland waters!”<br/>
Then the singer, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Leaped, a pike, upon the waters,<br/>
Quickly swam the rapid river,<br/>
Gained the frigid Pohya-border.<br/>
There his native form resuming,<br/>
Walked he as a mighty hero,<br/>
On the dismal isle of Louhi,<br/>
Spake the wicked sons of Northland:<br/>
Come thou to Pohyola’s court-room.”<br/>
To Pohyola’s, court he hastened.<br/>
Spake again the sons of evil:<br/>
Come thou to the halls of Louhi!”<br/>
To Pohyola’s halls he hastened.<br/>
On the latch he laid his fingers,<br/>
Set his foot within the fore-hall,<br/>
Hastened to the inner chamber,<br/>
Underneath the painted rafters,<br/>
Where the Northland-heroes gather.<br/>
There he found the Pohya-masters<br/>
Girded with their swords of battle,<br/>
With their spears and battle-axes,<br/>
With their fatal bows and arrows,<br/>
For the death of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Ancient bard, Suwantolainen.<br/>
Thus they asked the hero-stranger.<br/>
“Magic swimmer of the Northland,<br/>
Son of evil, what the message<br/>
That thou bringest from thy people,<br/>
What thy mission to Pohyola?”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and truthful,<br/>
Thus addressed the hosts of Louhi:<br/>
“For the Sun I come to Northland,<br/>
Come to seek the Moon in Pohya;<br/>
Tell me where the Sun lies hidden,<br/>
Where the golden Moon is sleeping.”<br/>
Spake the evil sons of Pohya:<br/>
“Both the Sun and Moon are hidden<br/>
In the rock of many colors,<br/>
In the copper-bearing mountain,<br/>
In a cavern iron-banded,<br/>
In the stone-berg of Pohyola,<br/>
Nevermore to gain their freedom,<br/>
Nevermore to shine in Northland!”<br/>
Spake the hero, Wainamoinen:<br/>
“If the Sun be not uncovered,<br/>
If the Moon leave not her dungeon,<br/>
I will challenge all Pohyola<br/>
To the test of spear or broadsword,<br/>
Let us now our weapons measure!”<br/>
Quick the hero of Wainola<br/>
Drew his mighty sword of magic;<br/>
On its border shone the moonlight,<br/>
On its hilt the Sun was shining,<br/>
On its back, a neighing stallion,<br/>
On its face a cat was mewing,<br/>
Beautiful his magic weapon.<br/>
Quick the hero-swords are tested,<br/>
And the blades are rightly measured<br/>
Wainamoinen’s sword is longest<br/>
By a single grain of barley,<br/>
By a blade of straw, the widest.<br/>
To the court-yard rushed the heroes,<br/>
Hastened to the deadly combat,<br/>
On the plains of Sariola.<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
Strikes one blow, and then a second,<br/>
Strikes a third time, cuts and conquers.<br/>
As the house-maids slice the turnips,<br/>
As they lop the heads of cabbage,<br/>
As the stalks of flax are broken,<br/>
So the heads of Louhi’s heroes<br/>
Fall before the magic broadsword<br/>
Of the ancient Wainamoinen.<br/>
Then victor from Wainola,<br/>
Ancient bard and great magician,<br/>
Went to find the Sun in slumber,<br/>
And the golden Moon discover,<br/>
In the copper-bearing Mountains,<br/>
In the cavern iron-banded,<br/>
In the stone-berg of Pohyola.<br/>
He had gone but little distance,<br/>
When he found a sea-green island;<br/>
On the island stood a birch-tree,<br/>
Near the birch-tree stood a pillar<br/>
Carved in stone of many colors;<br/>
In the pillar, nine large portals<br/>
Bolted in a hundred places;<br/>
In the rock he found a crevice<br/>
Sending forth a gleam of sunlight.<br/>
Quick he drew his mighty broadsword,<br/>
From the pillar struck three colors,<br/>
From the magic of his weapon;<br/>
And the pillar fell asunder,<br/>
Three the number of the fragments.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and faithful,<br/>
Through the crevice looked and wondered.<br/>
In the center of the pillar,<br/>
From a scarlet-colored basin,<br/>
Noxious serpents beer were drinking,<br/>
And the adders eating spices.<br/>
Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:<br/>
“Therefore has Pohyola’s hostess<br/>
Little drink to give to strangers,<br/>
Since her beer is drank by serpents,<br/>
And her spices given to adders.”<br/>
Quick he draws his magic fire-blade,<br/>
Cuts the vipers green in pieces,<br/>
Lops the heads off all the adders,<br/>
Speaks these words of master-magic:<br/>
Thus, hereafter, let the serpent<br/>
Drink the famous beer of barley,<br/>
Feed upon the Northland-spices!”<br/>
Wainamoinen, the magician,<br/>
The eternal wizard-singer,<br/>
Sought to open wide the portals<br/>
With the hands and words of magic;<br/>
But his hands had lost their cunning,<br/>
And his magic gone to others.<br/>
Thereupon the ancient minstrel<br/>
Quick returning, heavy-hearted,<br/>
To his native halls and hamlets,<br/>
Thus addressed his brother-heroes:<br/>
“Woman, he without his weapons,<br/>
With no implements, a weakling!<br/>
Sun and Moon have I discovered,<br/>
But I could not force the Portals<br/>
Leading to their rocky cavern<br/>
In the copper bearing mountain.<br/>
Spake the reckless Lemminkainen<br/>
“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Why was I not taken with thee<br/>
To become, thy war-companion?<br/>
Would have been of goodly service,<br/>
Would have drawn the bolts or broken,<br/>
All the portals to the cavern,<br/>
Where the Sun and Moon lie hidden<br/>
In the copper-bearing mountain!”<br/>
Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,<br/>
Thus replied to Lemminkainen:<br/>
“Empty Words will break no portals,<br/>
Draw no bolts of any moment;<br/>
Locks and bolts are never broken.<br/>
With the words of little wisdom!<br/>
Greater means than thou commandest<br/>
Must be used to free the sunshine,<br/>
Free the moonlight from her dungeon.”<br/>
Wainamoinen, not discouraged,<br/>
Hastened to the forge and smithy,<br/>
Spake these words to Ilmarinen:<br/>
“O thou famous metal-artist,<br/>
Forge for me a magic trident,<br/>
Forge from steel a dozen stout-rings,<br/>
Master-keys, a goodly number,<br/>
Iron bars and heavy hammers,<br/>
That the Sun we may uncover<br/>
In the copper-bearing mountain,<br/>
In the stone-berg of Pohyola.”<br/>
Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The eternal metal-worker,<br/>
Forged the needs of Wainamoinen,<br/>
Forged for him the magic trident,<br/>
Forged from steel a dozen stout-rings,<br/>
Master-keys a goodly number,<br/>
Iron bars and heavy hammers,<br/>
Not the largest, nor the smallest,<br/>
Forged them of the right dimensions.<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Northland’s old and toothless wizard,<br/>
Fastened wings upon her shoulders,<br/>
As an eagle, sailed the heavens,<br/>
Over field, and fen, and forest,<br/>
Over Pohya’s many, waters,<br/>
To the hamlets of Wainola,<br/>
To the forge of Ilmarinen.<br/>
Quick the famous metal-worker<br/>
Went to see if winds were blowing;<br/>
Found the winds at peace and silent,<br/>
Found an eagle, sable-colored,<br/>
Perched upon his window-casement.<br/>
Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:<br/>
“Magic bird, whom art thou seeking,<br/>
Why art sitting at my window?”<br/>
This the answer of the eagle:<br/>
“Art thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,<br/>
The eternal iron-forger,<br/>
Master of the magic metals,<br/>
Northland’s wonder-working artist?”<br/>
Ilmarinen gave this answer:<br/>
“There is nothing here of wonder,<br/>
Since I forged the dome of heaven,<br/>
Forged the earth a concave cover!”<br/>
Spake again the magic eagle:<br/>
Why this ringing of thine anvil,<br/>
Why this knocking of thy hammer,<br/>
Tell me what thy hands are forging?”<br/>
This the answer of the blacksmith:<br/>
“’Tis a collar I am forging<br/>
For the neck of wicked Louhi,<br/>
Toothless witch of Sariola,<br/>
Stealer of the silver sunshine,<br/>
Stealer of the golden moonlight;<br/>
With this collar I shall bind her<br/>
To the iron-rock of Ehstland!”<br/>
Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,<br/>
Saw misfortune fast approaching,<br/>
Saw destruction flying over,<br/>
Saw the signs of bad-luck lower;<br/>
Quickly winged her way through ether<br/>
To her native halls and chambers,<br/>
To the darksome Sariola,<br/>
There unlocked the massive portals<br/>
Where the Sun and Moon were hidden,<br/>
In the rock of many colors,<br/>
In the cavern iron-banded,<br/>
In the copper-bearing mountain.<br/>
Then again the wicked Louhi<br/>
Changed her withered form and features,<br/>
And became a dove of good-luck;<br/>
Straightway winged the starry heavens,<br/>
Over field, and fen, and forest,<br/>
To the meadows of Wainola,<br/>
To the plains of Kalevala,<br/>
To the forge of Ilmarinen.<br/>
This the question of the blacksmith<br/>
“Wherefore comest, dove of good-luck,<br/>
What the tidings that thou bringest?”<br/>
Thus the magic bird made answer:<br/>
“Wherefore come I to thy smithy?<br/>
Come to bring the joyful tidings<br/>
That the Sun has left his cavern,<br/>
Left the rock of many colors,<br/>
Left the stone-berg of Pohyola;<br/>
That the Moon no more is hidden<br/>
In the copper-bearing mountains,<br/>
In the caverns iron-banded.”<br/>
Straightway hastened Ilmarinen<br/>
To the threshold of his smithy,<br/>
Quickly scanned the far horizon,<br/>
Saw again the silver sunshine,<br/>
Saw once more the golden moonlight,<br/>
Bringing peace, and joy, and plenty,<br/>
To the homes of Kalevala.<br/>
Thereupon the blacksmith hastened<br/>
To his brother, Wainamoinen,<br/>
Spake these words to the magician:<br/>
“O thou ancient bard and minstrel,<br/>
The eternal wizard-singer<br/>
See, the Sun again is shining,<br/>
And the golden Moon is beaming<br/>
From their long-neglected places,<br/>
From their stations in the sky-vault!”<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and faithful,<br/>
Straightway hastened to the court-yard,<br/>
Looked upon the far horizon,<br/>
Saw once more the silver sunshine,<br/>
Saw again the golden moonlight,<br/>
Bringing peace, and joy, and plenty,<br/>
To the people of the Northland,<br/>
And the minstrel spake these measures:<br/>
“Greetings to thee, Sun of fortune,<br/>
Greetings to thee, Moon of good-luck,<br/>
Welcome sunshine, welcome moonlight,<br/>
Golden is the dawn of morning!<br/>
Free art thou, O Sun of silver,<br/>
Free again, O Moon beloved,<br/>
As the sacred cuckoo’s singing,<br/>
As the ring-dove’s liquid cooings.<br/>
“Rise, thou silver Sun, each Morning,<br/>
Source of light and life hereafter,<br/>
Bring us, daily, joyful greetings,<br/>
Fill our homes with peace and plenty,<br/>
That our sowing, fishing, hunting,<br/>
May be prospered by thy coming.<br/>
Travel on thy daily journey,<br/>
Let the Moon be ever with thee;<br/>
Glide along thy way rejoicing,<br/>
End thy journeyings in slumber;<br/>
Rest at evening in the ocean,<br/>
When the daily cares have ended,<br/>
To the good of all thy people,<br/>
To the pleasure Of Wainoloa,<br/>
To the joy of Kalevala!”</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap50"/>RUNE L.<br/>
MARIATTA—WAINAMOINEN’S DEPARTURE.</h2>
<p>Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Grew to maidenhood in Northland,<br/>
In the cabin of her father,<br/>
In the chambers of her mother,<br/>
Golden ringlets, silver girdles,<br/>
Worn against the keys paternal,<br/>
Glittering upon her bosom;<br/>
Wore away the father’s threshold<br/>
With the long robes of her garments;<br/>
Wore away the painted rafters<br/>
With her beauteous silken ribbons;<br/>
Wore away the gilded pillars<br/>
With the touching of her fingers;<br/>
Wore away the birchen flooring<br/>
With the tramping of her fur-shoes.<br/>
Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Magic maid of little stature,<br/>
Guarded well her sacred virtue,<br/>
Her sincerity and honor,<br/>
Fed upon the dainty whiting,<br/>
On the inner bark of birch-wood,<br/>
On the tender flesh of lambkins.<br/>
When she hastened in the evening<br/>
To her milking in the hurdles,<br/>
Spake in innocence as follows:<br/>
“Never will the snow-white virgin<br/>
Milk the kine of one unworthy!”<br/>
When she journeyed over snow-fields,<br/>
On the seat beside her father,<br/>
Spake in purity as follows:<br/>
“Not behind a steed unworthy<br/>
Will I ever ride the snow-sledge!”<br/>
Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Lived a virgin with her mother,<br/>
As a maiden highly honored,<br/>
Lived in innocence and beauty,<br/>
Daily drove her flocks to pasture,<br/>
Walking with the gentle lambkins.<br/>
When the lambkins climbed the mountains,<br/>
When they gamboled on the hill-tops,<br/>
Stepped the virgin to the meadow,<br/>
Skipping through a grove of lindens,<br/>
At the calling of the cuckoo,<br/>
To the songster’s golden measures.<br/>
Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Looked about, intently listened,<br/>
Sat upon the berry-meadow<br/>
Sat awhile, and meditated<br/>
On a hillock by the forest,<br/>
And soliloquized as follows:<br/>
“Call to me, thou golden cuckoo,<br/>
Sing, thou sacred bird of Northland,<br/>
Sing, thou silver breasted songster,<br/>
Speak, thou strawberry of Ehstland,<br/>
Tell bow long must I unmarried,<br/>
As a shepherdess neglected,<br/>
Wander o’er these bills and mountains,<br/>
Through these flowery fens and fallows.<br/>
Tell me, cuckoo of the woodlands,<br/>
Sing to me how many summers<br/>
I must live without a husband,<br/>
As a shepherdess neglected!”<br/>
Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Lived a shepherd-maid for ages,<br/>
As a virgin with her mother.<br/>
Wretched are the lives of shepherds,<br/>
Lives of maidens still more wretched,<br/>
Guarding flocks upon the mountains;<br/>
Serpents creep in bog and stubble,<br/>
On the greensward dart the lizards;<br/>
But it was no serpent singing,<br/>
Nor a sacred lizard calling,<br/>
It was but the mountain-berry<br/>
Calling to the lonely maiden:<br/>
“Come, O virgin, come and pluck me,<br/>
Come and take me to thy bosom,<br/>
Take me, tinsel-breasted virgin,<br/>
Take me, maiden, copper-belted,<br/>
Ere the slimy snail devours me,<br/>
Ere the black-worm feeds upon me.<br/>
Hundreds pass my way unmindful,<br/>
Thousands come within my hearing,<br/>
Berry-maidens swarm about me,<br/>
Children come in countless numbers,<br/>
None of these has come to gather,<br/>
Come to pluck this ruddy berry.”<br/>
Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Listened to its gentle pleading,<br/>
Ran to pick the berry, calling,<br/>
With her fair and dainty fingers,.<br/>
Saw it smiling near the meadow,<br/>
Like a cranberry in feature,<br/>
Like a strawberry in flavor;<br/>
But be Virgin, Mariatta,<br/>
Could not pluck the woodland-stranger,<br/>
Thereupon she cut a charm-stick,<br/>
Downward pressed upon the berry,<br/>
When it rose as if by magic,<br/>
Rose above her shoes of ermine,<br/>
Then above her copper girdle,<br/>
Darted upward to her bosom,<br/>
Leaped upon the maiden’s shoulder,<br/>
On her dimpled chin it rested,<br/>
On her lips it perched a moment,<br/>
Hastened to her tongue expectant<br/>
To and fro it rocked and lingered,<br/>
Thence it hastened on its journey,<br/>
Settled in the maiden’s bosom.<br/>
Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Thus became a bride impregnate,<br/>
Wedded to the mountain-berry;<br/>
Lingered in her room at morning,<br/>
Sat at midday in the darkness,<br/>
Hastened to her couch at evening.<br/>
Thus the watchful mother wonders:<br/>
“What has happened to our Mary,<br/>
To our virgin, Mariatta,<br/>
That she throws aside her girdle,<br/>
Shyly slips through hall and chamber,<br/>
Lingers in her room at morning,<br/>
Hastens to her couch at evening,<br/>
Sits at midday in the darkness?”<br/>
On the floor a babe was playing,<br/>
And the young child thus made answer:<br/>
“This has happened to our Mary,<br/>
To our virgin, Mariatta,<br/>
This misfortune to the maiden:<br/>
She has lingered by the meadows,<br/>
Played too long among the lambkins,<br/>
Tasted of the mountain-berry.”<br/>
Long the virgin watched and waited,<br/>
Anxiously the days she counted,<br/>
Waiting for the dawn of trouble.<br/>
Finally she asked her mother,<br/>
These the words of Mariatta:<br/>
“Faithful mother, fond and tender,<br/>
Mother whom I love and cherish,<br/>
Make for me a place befitting,<br/>
Where my troubles may be lessened,<br/>
And my heavy burdens lightened.”<br/>
This the answer of the mother:<br/>
“Woe to thee, thou Hisi-maiden,<br/>
Since thou art a bride unworthy,<br/>
Wedded only to dishonor!”<br/>
Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Thus replied in truthful measures:<br/>
“I am not a maid of Hisi,<br/>
I am not a bride unworthy,<br/>
Am not wedded to dishonor;<br/>
As a shepherdess I wandered<br/>
With the lambkins to the glen-wood,<br/>
Wandered to the berry-mountain,<br/>
Where the strawberry had ripened;<br/>
Quick as thought I plucked the berry,<br/>
On my tongue I gently laid it,<br/>
To and fro it rocked and lingered,<br/>
Settled in my heaving bosom.<br/>
This the source of all my trouble,<br/>
Only cause of my dishonor!”<br/>
As the mother was relentless,<br/>
Asked the maiden of her father,<br/>
This the virgin-mother’s pleading:<br/>
O my father, full of pity,<br/>
Source of both my good and evil,<br/>
Build for me a place befitting,<br/>
Where my troubles may be lessened,<br/>
And my heavy burdens lightened.”<br/>
This the answer of the father,<br/>
Of the father unforgiving:<br/>
“Go, thou evil child of Hisi,<br/>
Go, thou child of sin and sorrow,<br/>
Wedded only to dishonor,<br/>
To the Great Bear’s rocky chamber,<br/>
To the stone-cave of the growler,<br/>
There to lessen all thy troubles,<br/>
There to cast thy heavy burdens!”<br/>
Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Thus made answer to her father:<br/>
“I am not a child of Hisi,<br/>
I am not a bride unworthy,<br/>
Am not wedded to dishonor;<br/>
I shall bear a noble hero,<br/>
I shall bear a son immortal,<br/>
Who will rule among the mighty,<br/>
Rule the ancient Wainamoinen.”<br/>
Thereupon the virgin-mother<br/>
Wandered hither, wandered thither,<br/>
Seeking for a place befitting,<br/>
Seeking for a worthy birth-place<br/>
For her unborn son and hero;<br/>
Finally these words she uttered<br/>
“Piltti, thou my youngest maiden,<br/>
Trustiest of all my servants,<br/>
Seek a place within the village,<br/>
Ask it of the brook of Sara,<br/>
For the troubled Mariatta,<br/>
Child of sorrow and misfortune.”<br/>
Thereupon the little maiden,<br/>
Piltti, spake these words in answer:<br/>
“Whom shall I entreat for succor,<br/>
Who will lend me his assistance?<br/>
These the words of Mariatta:<br/>
“Go and ask it of Ruotus,<br/>
Where the reed-brook pours her waters.”<br/>
Thereupon the servant, Piltti,<br/>
Ever hopeful, ever willing,<br/>
Hastened to obey her mistress,<br/>
Needing not her exhortation;<br/>
Hastened like the rapid river,<br/>
Like the flying smoke of battle<br/>
To the cabin of Ruotus.<br/>
When she walked the hill-tops tottered,<br/>
When she ran the mountains trembled;<br/>
Shore-reeds danced upon the pasture,<br/>
Sandstones skipped about the heather<br/>
As the maiden, Piltti, hastened<br/>
To the dwelling of Ruotus.<br/>
At his table in his cabin<br/>
Sat Ruotus, eating, drinking,<br/>
In his simple coat of linen.<br/>
With his elbows on the table<br/>
Spake the wizard in amazement:<br/>
“Why hast thou, a maid of evil,<br/>
Come to see me in my cavern,<br/>
What the message thou art bringing?<br/>
Thereupon the servant, Piltti,<br/>
Gave this answer to the wizard:<br/>
“Seek I for a spot befitting,<br/>
Seek I for a worthy birth-place,<br/>
For an unborn child and hero;<br/>
Seek it near the Sara-streamlet,<br/>
Where the reed-brook pours her waters.<br/>
Came the wife of old Ruotus,<br/>
Walking with her arms akimbo,<br/>
Thus addressed the maiden, Piltti:<br/>
“Who is she that asks assistance,<br/>
Who the maiden thus dishonored,<br/>
What her name, and who her kindred?”<br/>
“I have come for Mariatta,<br/>
For the worthy virgin-mother.”<br/>
Spake the wife of old Ruotus,<br/>
Evil-minded, cruel-hearted:<br/>
“Occupied are all our chambers,<br/>
All our bath-rooms near the reed-brook;<br/>
in the mount of fire are couches,<br/>
is a stable in the forest,<br/>
For the flaming horse of Hisi;<br/>
In the stable is a manger<br/>
Fitting birth-place for the hero<br/>
From the wife of cold misfortune,<br/>
Worthy couch for Mariatta!”<br/>
Thereupon the servant, Piltti,<br/>
Hastened to her anxious mistress,<br/>
Spake these measures, much regretting.<br/>
“There is not a place befitting,<br/>
on the silver brook of Sara.<br/>
Spake the wife of old Ruotus:<br/>
‘Occupied are all the chambers,<br/>
All the bath-rooms near the reed-brook;<br/>
In the mount of fire are couches,<br/>
Is a stable, in the forest,<br/>
For the flaming horse of Hisi;<br/>
In the stable is a manger,<br/>
Fitting birth-place for the hero<br/>
From the wife of cold misfortune,<br/>
Worthy couch for Mariatta.’”<br/>
Thereupon the hapless maiden,<br/>
Mariatta, virgin-mother,<br/>
Fell to bitter tears and murmurs,<br/>
Spake these words in depths of sorrow:<br/>
“I, alas! must go an outcast,<br/>
Wander as a wretched hireling,<br/>
Like a servant in dishonor,<br/>
Hasten to the burning mountain,<br/>
To the stable in the forest,<br/>
Make my bed within a manger,<br/>
Near the flaming steed of Hisi!”<br/>
Quick the hapless virgin-mother,<br/>
Outcast from her father’s dwelling,<br/>
Gathered up her flowing raiment,<br/>
Grasped a broom of birchen branches,<br/>
Hastened forth in pain and sorrow<br/>
To the stable in the woodlands,<br/>
On the heights of Tapio’s mountains,<br/>
Spake these words in supplication:<br/>
“Come, I pray thee, my Creator,<br/>
Only friend in times of trouble,<br/>
Come to me and bring protection<br/>
To thy child, the virgin-mother,<br/>
To the maiden, Mariatta,<br/>
In this hour of sore affliction.<br/>
Come to me, benignant Ukko,<br/>
Come, thou only hope and refuge,<br/>
Lest thy guiltless child should perish,<br/>
Die the death of the unworthy!”<br/>
When the virgin, Mariatta,<br/>
Had arrived within the stable<br/>
Of the flaming horse of Hisi,<br/>
She addressed the steed as follows:<br/>
“Breathe, O sympathizing fire-horse,<br/>
Breathe on me, the virgin-mother,<br/>
Let thy heated breath give moisture,<br/>
Let thy pleasant warmth surround me,<br/>
Like the vapor of the morning;<br/>
Let this pure and helpless maiden<br/>
Find a refuge in thy manger!”<br/>
Thereupon the horse, in pity,<br/>
Breathed the moisture of his nostrils<br/>
On the body of the virgin,<br/>
Wrapped her in a cloud of vapor,<br/>
Gave her warmth and needed comforts,<br/>
Gave his aid to the afflicted,<br/>
To the virgin, Mariatta.<br/>
There the babe was born and cradled<br/>
Cradled in a woodland-manger,<br/>
Of the virgin, Mariatta,<br/>
Pure as pearly dews of morning,<br/>
Holy as the stars in heaven.<br/>
There the mother rocks her infant,<br/>
In his swaddling clothes she wraps him,<br/>
Lays him in her robes of linen;<br/>
Carefully the babe she nurtures,<br/>
Well she guards her much-beloved,<br/>
Guards her golden child of beauty,<br/>
Her beloved gem of silver.<br/>
But alas! the child has vanished,<br/>
Vanished while the mother slumbered.<br/>
Mariatta, lone and wretched,<br/>
Fell to weeping, broken-hearted,<br/>
Hastened off to seek her infant.<br/>
Everywhere the mother sought him,<br/>
Sought her golden child of beauty,<br/>
Her beloved gem of silver;<br/>
Sought him underneath the millstone,<br/>
In the sledge she sought him vainly,<br/>
Underneath the sieve she sought him,<br/>
Underneath the willow-basket,<br/>
Touched the trees, the grass she parted,<br/>
Long she sought her golden infant,<br/>
Sought him on the fir-tree-mountain,<br/>
In the vale, and hill, and heather;<br/>
Looks within the clumps of flowers,<br/>
Well examines every thicket,<br/>
Lifts the juniper and willow,<br/>
Lifts the branches of the alder.<br/>
Lo! a star has come to meet her,<br/>
And the star she thus beseeches-.<br/>
“O, thou guiding-star of Northland,<br/>
Star of hope, by God created,<br/>
Dost thou know and wilt thou tell me<br/>
Where my darling child has wandered,<br/>
Where my holy babe lies hidden?”<br/>
Thus the star of Northland answers:<br/>
“If I knew, I would not tell thee;<br/>
’Tis thy child that me created,<br/>
Set me here to watch at evening,<br/>
In the cold to shine forever,<br/>
Here to twinkle in the darkness.”<br/>
Comes the golden Moon to meet her,<br/>
And the Moon she thus beseeches:<br/>
“Golden Moon, by Ukko fashioned,<br/>
Hope and joy of Kalevala,<br/>
Dost thou know and wilt thou tell me<br/>
Where my darling child has wandered,<br/>
Where my holy babe lies hidden?<br/>
Speaks the golden Moon in answer:<br/>
“If I knew I would not tell thee;<br/>
’Tis thy child that me created,<br/>
Here to wander in the darkness,<br/>
All alone at eve to wander<br/>
On my cold and cheerless journey,<br/>
Sleeping only in the daylight,<br/>
Shining for the good of others.”<br/>
Thereupon the virgin-mother<br/>
Falls again to bitter weeping,<br/>
Hastens on through fen and forest,<br/>
Seeking for her babe departed.<br/>
Comes the silver Sun to meet her,<br/>
And the Sun she thus addresses:<br/>
“Silver Sun by Ukko fashioned,<br/>
Source of light and life to Northland,<br/>
Dost thou know and wilt thou tell me<br/>
Where my darling child has wandered,<br/>
Where my holy babe lies hidden?”<br/>
Wisely does the Sun make answer:<br/>
“Well I know thy babe’s dominions,<br/>
Where thy holy child is sleeping,<br/>
Where Wainola’s light lies hidden;<br/>
’Tis thy child that me created,<br/>
Made me king of earth and ether,<br/>
Made the Moon and Stars attend me,<br/>
Set me here to shine at midday,<br/>
Makes me shine in silver raiment,<br/>
Lets me sleep and rest at evening;<br/>
Yonder is thy golden infant,<br/>
There thy holy babe lies sleeping,<br/>
Hidden to his belt in water,<br/>
Hidden in the reeds and rushes.”<br/>
Mariatta, child of beauty,<br/>
Virgin-mother of the Northland,<br/>
Straightway seeks her babe in Swamp-land,<br/>
Finds him in the reeds and rushes;<br/>
Takes the young child on her bosom<br/>
To the dwelling of her father.<br/>
There the infant grew in beauty,<br/>
Gathered strength, and light, and wisdom,<br/>
All of Suomi saw and wondered.<br/>
No one knew what name to give him;<br/>
When the mother named him, Flower,<br/>
Others named him, Son-of-Sorrow.<br/>
When the virgin, Mariatta,<br/>
Sought the priesthood to baptize him,<br/>
Came an old man, Wirokannas,<br/>
With a cup of holy water,<br/>
Bringing to the babe his blessing;<br/>
And the gray-beard spake as follows:<br/>
“I shall not baptize a wizard,<br/>
Shall not bless a black-magician<br/>
With the drops of holy water;<br/>
Let the young child be examined,<br/>
Let us know that he is worthy,<br/>
Lest he prove the son of witchcraft.”<br/>
Thereupon old Wirokannas<br/>
Called the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
The eternal wisdom-singer,<br/>
To inspect the infant-wonder,<br/>
To report him good or evil.<br/>
Wainamoinen, old and faithful,<br/>
Carefully the child examined,<br/>
Gave this answer to his people:<br/>
“Since the child is but an outcast,<br/>
Born and cradled in a manger,<br/>
Since the berry is his father;<br/>
Let him lie upon the heather,<br/>
Let him sleep among the rushes,<br/>
Let him live upon the mountains;<br/>
Take the young child to the marshes,<br/>
Dash his head against the birch-tree.”<br/>
Then the child of Mariatta,<br/>
Only two weeks old, made answer:<br/>
“O, thou ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
Son of Folly and Injustice,<br/>
Senseless hero of the Northland,<br/>
Falsely hast thou rendered judgment.<br/>
In thy years, for greater follies,<br/>
Greater sins and misdemeanors,<br/>
Thou wert not unjustly punished.<br/>
In thy former years of trouble,<br/>
When thou gavest thine own brother,<br/>
For thy selfish life a ransom,<br/>
Thus to save thee from destruction,<br/>
Then thou wert not sent to Swamp-land<br/>
To be murdered for thy follies.<br/>
In thy former years of sorrow,<br/>
When the beauteous Aino perished<br/>
In the deep and boundless blue-sea,<br/>
To escape thy persecutions,<br/>
Then thou wert not evil-treated,<br/>
Wert not banished by thy people.”<br/>
Thereupon old Wirokannas,<br/>
Of the wilderness the ruler,<br/>
Touched the child with holy water,<br/>
Crave the wonder-babe his blessing,<br/>
Gave him rights of royal heirship,<br/>
Free to live and grow a hero,<br/>
To become a mighty ruler,<br/>
King and Master of Karyala.<br/>
As the years passed Wainamoinen<br/>
Recognized his waning powers,<br/>
Empty-handed, heavy-hearted,<br/>
Sang his farewell song to Northland,<br/>
To the people of Wainola;<br/>
Sang himself a boat of copper,<br/>
Beautiful his bark of magic;<br/>
At the helm sat the magician,<br/>
Sat the ancient wisdom-singer.<br/>
Westward, westward, sailed the hero<br/>
O’er the blue-back of the waters,<br/>
Singing as he left Wainola,<br/>
This his plaintive song and echo:<br/>
“Suns may rise and set in Suomi,<br/>
Rise and set for generations,<br/>
When the North will learn my teachings,<br/>
Will recall my wisdom-sayings,<br/>
Hungry for the true religion.<br/>
Then will Suomi need my coming,<br/>
Watch for me at dawn of morning,<br/>
That I may bring back the Sampo,<br/>
Bring anew the harp of joyance,<br/>
Bring again the golden moonlight,<br/>
Bring again the silver sunshine,<br/>
Peace and plenty to the Northland.”<br/>
Thus the ancient Wainamoinen,<br/>
In his copper-banded vessel,<br/>
Left his tribe in Kalevala,<br/>
Sailing o’er the rolling billows,<br/>
Sailing through the azure vapors,<br/>
Sailing through the dusk of evening,<br/>
Sailing to the fiery sunset,<br/>
To the higher-landed regions,<br/>
To the lower verge of heaven;<br/>
Quickly gained the far horizon,<br/>
Gained the purple-colored harbor.<br/>
There his bark be firmly anchored,<br/>
Rested in his boat of copper;<br/>
But he left his harp of magic,<br/>
Left his songs and wisdom-sayings,<br/>
To the lasting joy of Suomi.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap51"/>EPILOGUE</h2>
<p class="noindent">Now I end my measured singing,<br/>
Bid my weary tongue keep silence,<br/>
Leave my songs to other singers.<br/>
Horses have their times of resting<br/>
After many hours of labor;<br/>
Even sickles will grow weary<br/>
When they have been long at reaping;<br/>
Waters seek a quiet haven<br/>
After running long in rivers;<br/>
Fire subsides and sinks in slumber<br/>
At the dawning of the morning<br/>
Therefore I should end my singing,<br/>
As my song is growing weary,<br/>
For the pleasure of the evening,<br/>
For the joy of morn arising.<br/>
Often I have heard it chanted,<br/>
Often heard the words repeated:<br/>
“Worthy cataracts and rivers<br/>
Never empty all their waters.”<br/>
Thus the wise and worthy singer<br/>
Sings not all his garnered wisdom;<br/>
Better leave unsung some sayings<br/>
Than to sing them out of season.<br/>
Thus beginning, and thus ending,<br/>
Do I roll up all my legends,<br/>
Roll them in a ball for safety,<br/>
In my memory arrange them,<br/>
In their narrow place of resting,<br/>
Lest the songs escape unheeded,<br/>
While the lock is still unopened,<br/>
While the teeth remain unparted,<br/>
And the weary tongue is silent.<br/>
Why should I sing other legends,<br/>
Chant them in the glen and forest,<br/>
Sing them on the hill and heather?<br/>
Cold and still my golden mother<br/>
Lies beneath the meadow, sleeping,<br/>
Hears my ancient songs no longer,<br/>
Cannot listen to my singing;<br/>
Only will the forest listen,<br/>
Sacred birches, sighing pine-trees,<br/>
Junipers endowed with kindness,<br/>
Alder-trees that love to bear me,<br/>
With the aspens and the willows.<br/>
When my loving mother left me,<br/>
Young was I, and low of stature;<br/>
Like the cuckoo of the forest,<br/>
Like the thrush upon the heather,<br/>
Like the lark I learned to twitter,<br/>
Learned to sing my simple measures,<br/>
Guided by a second mother,<br/>
Stern and cold, without affection;<br/>
Drove me helpless from my chamber<br/>
To the wind-side of her dwelling,<br/>
To the north-side of her cottage,<br/>
Where the chilling winds in mercy<br/>
Carried off the unprotected.<br/>
As a lark I learned to wander,<br/>
Wander as a lonely song-bird,<br/>
Through the forests and the fenlands<br/>
Quietly o’er hill and heather;<br/>
Walked in pain about the marshes,<br/>
Learned the songs of winds and waters,<br/>
Learned the music of the ocean,<br/>
And the echoes of the woodlands.<br/>
Many men that live to murmur,<br/>
Many women live to censure,<br/>
Many speak with evil motives;<br/>
Many they with wretched voices<br/>
Curse me for my wretched singing,<br/>
Blame my tongue for speaking wisdom,<br/>
Call my ancient songs unworthy,<br/>
Blame the songs and curse the singer.<br/>
Be not thus, my worthy people,<br/>
Blame me not for singing badly,<br/>
Unpretending as a minstrel.<br/>
I have never had the teaching,<br/>
Never lived with ancient heroes,<br/>
Never learned the tongues of strangers,<br/>
Never claimed to know much wisdom.<br/>
Others have had language-masters,<br/>
Nature was my only teacher,<br/>
Woods and waters my instructors.<br/>
Homeless, friendless, lone, and needy,<br/>
Save in childhood with my mother,<br/>
When beneath her painted rafters,<br/>
Where she twirled the flying spindle,<br/>
By the work-bench of my brother,<br/>
By the window of my sister,<br/>
In. the cabin of my father,<br/>
In my early days of childhood.<br/>
Be this as it may, my people,<br/>
This may point the way to others,<br/>
To the singers better gifted,<br/>
For the good of future ages,<br/>
For the coming generations,<br/>
For the rising folk of Suomi.</p>
</div>
<!--end chapter-->
<div class="chapter">
<h2>
<a id="chap52"/>GLOSSARY</h2>
<p class="noindent">Aar’ni (Ar’ni). The guardian of hidden treasures.<br/>
A-ha’va. The West-wind; the father of the swift dogs.<br/>
Ah’ti. The same as Lemminkainen.<br/>
Ah’to. The great god of the waters.<br/>
Ah’to-la. The water-castle of Ahto and his people.<br/>
Ah’to-lai’set. The inhabitants of Ahtola.<br/>
Ai-nik’ki. A sister of Ahti.<br/>
Ai’no (i’no). Youkahainen’s sister.<br/>
An’te-ro. A goddess of the waves.<br/>
Ai’nue-lake. The lake into which the Fire-child falls.<br/>
An-nik’ki. Ilmarinen’s sister.<br/>
An’te-ro. Another name for Wipanen, or Antero Wipunen.<br/>
Dus’ter-land. The Northland; Pimentola.<br/>
Et’e-le’tar. A daugter of the South-wind.<br/>
Fire-Child. A synonym of Panu.<br/>
Frost. The English for Pakkanen.<br/>
Hal’lap-yo’ra. A lake in Finland.<br/>
Hal’ti-a (plural Haltiat). The Genius of Finnish mythology.<br/>
Het’e-wa’ne. The Finnish name of the Pleiades.<br/>
Hi’si (original Hiisi). The Evil Principle; also called Jutas, Lempo, and Piru.<br/>
Mon’ja-tar. The daughter of the Pine-tree.<br/>
Hor’na. A sacred rock in Finland.<br/>
I’ku-Tur’so. An evil giant of the sea.<br/>
Il’ma-ri’nem. The worker of the metals; a brother of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Il’ma-tar. Daughter of the Air, and mother of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Il’po-tar. Believed to be the daughter of the Snow flake; the same as Louhi.<br/>
Im-a’tra. A celebrated waterfall near Wiborg.<br/>
In’ger-land. The present St. Petersburg.<br/>
Ja’men (Ya’men). A river of Finland.<br/>
Jor’dan. Curiously, the river of Palestine.<br/>
Jou’ka-hai’nen (You-ka-hai’nen). A celebrated minstrel of Pohyola.<br/>
Jou-ko’la (You-ko’la). The home or dwelling of Youkahainen.<br/>
Ju-ma’la (You-ma’la). Originally the heavens, then the god of the heavens, and finally God.<br/>
Ju’tas (yu’tas). The Evil Principle; Hisi, Piru, and Lempo are synonyms,<br/>
Kai’nto-lai’nen. A son of the god of metals; from his spear came the tongue of the serpent.<br/>
Ka-ler’vo. The father of Kullervo.<br/>
Ka-le’va (Kalewai’nen). The father of heroes; a hero in general.<br/>
Kal’e-va’la (kaleva, hero, and la, the place of). The land of heroes; the name of the epic poem of Finland.<br/>
Kal’e-va’tar (Kalewa’tar). Daughter of Kaleva.<br/>
Kal-e’vo. The same as Kaleva.<br/>
Ka’lew. Often used for Kaleva.<br/>
Kal’ma. The god of death.<br/>
Kam’mo. The father of Kimmo.<br/>
Kan’ka-hat’ta-ret. The goddesses of weaving.<br/>
Ka’pe. A synonym of Ilmatar, the mother of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Ka’po. A synonym of Osmotar.<br/>
Ka-re’len. A province of Finland.<br/>
Kar-ja’la, (karya’la). The seat of the waterfall, Kaatrakoski.<br/>
Kat’e-ja’tar (kataya’tar). The daughter of the Pine-tree.<br/>
Kat’ra-kos’ki (Kaatrakos’ki). A waterfall in Karjala.<br/>
Kau’ko. The same as Kaukomieli.<br/>
Kau’ko-miel’li. The same as Lemminkainen.<br/>
Kaup’pi. The Snowshoe-builder; Lylikki.<br/>
Ke’mi. A river of Finland.<br/>
Kim’mo. A name for the cow; the daughter of Kammo, the patron of the rocks.<br/>
Ki’npu-ki’nvi. The name of the rock at Hell-river, beneath which the spirits of all diseases are imprisoned.<br/>
Kir’kon-Woe’ki. Church dwarfs living under altars.<br/>
Knik’ka-no. Same as Knippana.<br/>
Knip’pa-no. Same as Tapio.<br/>
Koot’a-moi’nen. The Moon.<br/>
Kos’ken-nei’nti. The goddess of the cataract.<br/>
Kul-ler’vo. The vicious son of Kalervo.<br/>
Kul’ler-woi’nen. The same as Kullervo.<br/>
Kul’li. A beautiful daughter of Sahri.<br/>
Kun. The Moon, and the Moon-god.<br/>
Kun’tar. One of the daughters of the Moon.<br/>
Ku’ra (Kuura). The Hoar-frost; also called Tiera, a ball of ice.<br/>
Kul-lik’ki (also Kyl’li). The Sahri-maiden whom Lemminkainen kidnapped.<br/>
Lak’ka. Mother of Ilmarinen.<br/>
Lak-ko. The hostess of Kalevala.<br/>
Lem’min-kai’nen. One of the brothers of Wainamoinen; a son of Lempi.<br/>
Lem’pi-bay. A bay of Finland.<br/>
Lem’po. The Evil Principle; same as Hisi, Piru, and Jutas.<br/>
Lin’nun-ra’ta (Bird-way). The Milky-way.<br/>
Lou’hi. The hostess of Pohyola.<br/>
Low-ya’tar. Tuoni’s blind daughter, and the originator of the Plagues.<br/>
Lu’on-no’tar. One of the mystic maidens, and the nurse of Wainamoinen.<br/>
Lu’o-to’la. A bay of Finland, named with Joukola.<br/>
Ly-lik’ki (Lyylik’ki). Maker of the snow-shoe.<br/>
Maan-e’mo (man-e’mo). The mother of the Earth.<br/>
Ma’hi-set (Maa’hi-set). The invisibly small deities of Finnish mythology.<br/>
Mam’me-lai’nen. The goddess of hidden treasures.<br/>
Ma’na. A synonym of Tuoni, the god of death.<br/>
Man’a-lai’nen. The same as Mana.<br/>
Masr’i-at’ta (marja, berry). The Virgin Mary of Finnish mythology.<br/>
Mat’ka-Tep’po. The road-god.<br/>
Meh’i-lai’nen. The honey-bee.<br/>
Mel’a-tar. The goddess of the helm.<br/>
Met’so-la. The same as Tapiola, the abode of the god of the forest,<br/>
Mie-lik’ki. The hostess of the forest.<br/>
Mi-merk’ki. A synonym of Mielikki.<br/>
Mosk’va. A province of Suomi.<br/>
Mu-rik’ki (Muurik’ki). The name of the cow.<br/>
Ne’wa. A river of Finland.<br/>
Ny-rik’ki. A son of Tapio.<br/>
Os’mo. The same as Osmoinen.<br/>
Os-noi’nen. A synonym of Wainola’s hero.<br/>
Os’mo-tar. The daughter of Osmo; she directs the brewing of the beer for Ilmarinen’s wedding-feast.<br/>
O-ta’va. The Great Bear of the heavens.<br/>
Ot’so. The bear of Finland.<br/>
Poe’ivoe. The Sun, and the Sun god.<br/>
Pai’nva-tar. The goddess of the summer.<br/>
Pak’ka-nen. A synonym of Kura.<br/>
Pal-woi’nen. A synonym of Turi, and also of Wirokannas.<br/>
Pa’nu. The Fire-Child, born from the sword of Ukko.<br/>
Pa’ra. A tripod-deity, presiding over milk and cheese.<br/>
Pel’ler-woi’nen. The sower of the forests.<br/>
Pen’i-tar. A blind witch of Pohyola; and the mother of the dog.<br/>
Pik’ku Mies. The water-pigmy that felled the over-spreading oak-tree for Wainamoinen.<br/>
Pil’a-ya’tar (Pilaja’tar). The daughter of the Aspen; and the goddess of the Mountain-ash.<br/>
Pilt’ti. The maid-servant of Mariatta.<br/>
Pi’nmen-to’la. A province of Finland; another name for Pohyola.<br/>
Pi’nru. The same as Lempo, Jutas, and Hisi.<br/>
Pi’sa. A mountain of Finland.<br/>
Poh’ya (Poh’ja). An abbreviated form for Pohyola.<br/>
Poh-yo’la (Poh-jo’la). The Northland; Lapland.<br/>
Pok-ka’nen. The Frost, the son of Puhuri; a synonym of Tiera.<br/>
Puh-hu’ri. The North-wind; the father of Pokkanen.<br/>
Rem’men. The father of the hop-vine.<br/>
Re’mu. The same as Remmen.<br/>
Ru-o’tus. A persecutor of the Virgin Mariatta.<br/>
Rut’ya (Rut’ja). A waterfall of Northland.<br/>
Sah’ri (Saari). The home of Kyllikki.<br/>
Sam’po. The jewel that Ilmarinen forges from the magic metals; a talisman of success to the possessor; a continual source of strife between the tribes of the North.<br/>
Samp’sa. A synonym of Pellerwoinen.<br/>
Sa’ra. The same as Sariola.<br/>
Sar’i-o’la. The same as Pohyola.<br/>
Sat’ka. A goddess of the sea.<br/>
Sa’wa (Sa’wo). The eastern part of Finland.<br/>
Sim’a Pil’li (Honey-flute). The flute of Sima-suu.<br/>
Sim’a-Suu. One of the maidens of Tapio.<br/>
Sin’e-tar. The goddess of the blue sky.<br/>
Si-net’ta-ret. The goddesses of dyeing.<br/>
Suk’ka-mie’li. The goddess of love.<br/>
Suo’mi (swo’mi). The ancient abode of the Finns.<br/>
Suo’ne-tar (swone-tar). The goddess of the veins.<br/>
Suo-wak’ko. An old wizard of Pohyola.<br/>
Suo’ya-tar (Syo’jatar). The mother of the serpent.<br/>
Su’ve-tar (Suve, summer). Goddess of the South-wind<br/>
Su-wan’to-lai’nen. Another name for Wainamoinen.<br/>
Taeh’ti. The Polar Star.<br/>
Ta-he’tar. The daughter of the Stars.<br/>
Tai’nvas. The firmament in general.<br/>
Ta-ni’nka. A magic mansion of Pohja.<br/>
Ta’pi-o. The god of the forest.<br/>
Tel-le’rvo. A daughter of Tapio.<br/>
Ter’he-ne’tar. Daughter of the Fog.<br/>
Tie’ra. Same as Kura; the Hoar-frost.<br/>
Tont’tu. A little house-spirit.<br/>
Tu’a-me’tar. Daughter of the Alder-tree.<br/>
Tu-le’tar (Tuule’tar). A goddess of the winds.<br/>
Tu-lik’ki (Tuullk’ki). One of the daughters of Tapio.<br/>
Tu’o-ne’la. The abode of Tuoni.<br/>
Tuo’nen Poi’nka. The son of Tuoni.<br/>
Tu’o-ne’tar. The hostess of Death-land; a daughter of Tuoni.<br/>
Tu-o’ni. The god of death.<br/>
Tu’ri (Tuuri). The god of the Honey-land.<br/>
Turja (tur’ya). Another name for Pohya.<br/>
Tur’ya-lan’der. An epithet for one of the tribe of Louhi.<br/>
Tur’ya (Tyrja). A name for the waterfall of Rutya.<br/>
Uk’ko. The Great Spirit of Finnish mythology; his abode is in Jumala.<br/>
Uk’on-koi’nva (Ukko’s dog). The messenger of Ukko; the butterfly.<br/>
U’lap-pa’la. Another term for the abode of Tuoni.<br/>
Un’du-tar. Goddess of the fog.<br/>
U’ni. The god of sleep.<br/>
Un’ta-ma’la. A synonym for “the dismal Sariola.”<br/>
Un-ta’mo. The god of dreams; the dreamer; a brother of Kalervo, and his enemy.<br/>
Un’tar. The same as Undutar.<br/>
Un’to. The same as Untamo.<br/>
Utu-tyt’to. The same as Undutar.<br/>
Wai’nam-oi’nen (Vainamoinen). The chief hero of the Kalevala; the hero of Wainola, whose mother, Ilmatar, fell from the air into the ocean.<br/>
Wai’no (Vai’no). The same as Wainamoinen.<br/>
Wai-no’la. The home of Wainamoinen and his people; a synonym of Kalevala.<br/>
Wel-la’mo. The hostess of the waters.<br/>
Wet’e-hi’nen. An evil god of the sea.<br/>
Wi-pu’nen (Vipu’nen). An old song-giant that swallowed Wainamoinen searching for the “lost words.”<br/>
Wi’nro-kan’nas (Virokan’nas). Ruler of the wilderness; the slayer of the huge bull of Suomi; the priest that baptizes the son of Mariatta.<br/>
Wo’ya-lan’der (Vuojalan’der). An epithet for Laplander.<br/>
Wuok’sen (Vuo’ksen). A river in the east of Finland.<br/>
Wuok’si. The same as Wuoksen.</p>
