<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XXIII: Osmotar the Bride-Adviser</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Osmotar the Bride-Adviser</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Now the bride must be instructed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who will teach the Maid of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who instruct the Rainbow-daughter?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Osmotar, the wisdom-maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kalew’s fair and lovely virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Osmotar will give instructions</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bride of Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the orphaned bride of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach her how to live in pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to live and reign in glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Win her second mother’s praises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joyful in her husband’s dwelling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Osmotar in modest accents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the anxious bride addresses:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Maid of Beauty, lovely sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tender plant of Louhi’s gardens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear thou what thy sister teaches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen to her sage instructions:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go thou hence, my much beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wander far away, my flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travel on enwrapped in colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glide away in silks and ribbons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this house renowned and ancient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy father’s halls and court-yards</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste thee to thy husband’s village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten to his mother’s household;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange, the rooms in other dwellings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strange, the modes in other hamlets.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Full of thought must be thy going,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy work be well considered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quite unlike thy home in Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the meadows of thy father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the highlands of thy brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing through thy mother’s fenlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Culling daisies with thy sister.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When thou goest from thy father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst take whatever pleases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only three things leave behind thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thy day-dreams to thy sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thou kindness for thy mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy brother leave thy labors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take all else that thou desirest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throw away thine incantations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast thy sighing to the pine-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy maidenhood to zephyrs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy rejoicings to the couches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast thy trinkets to the children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy leisure to the gray-beards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast all pleasures to thy playmates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them take them to the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bury them beneath the mountain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou must hence acquire new habits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must forget thy former customs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother-love must be forsaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must love thy husband’s mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lower must thy head be bended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind words only must thou utter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou must hence acquire new habits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must forget thy former customs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father-love must be forsaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must love thy husband’s father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lower must thy head be bended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind words only must thou utter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou must hence acquire new habits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must forget thy former customs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother-love must be forsaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must love thy husband’s brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lower must thy head be bended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind words only must thou utter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou must hence acquire new habits</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must forget thy former customs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sister-love must be forsaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must love thy husband’s sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lower must thy head be bended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind words only must thou utter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Never in the course of ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never while the moonlight glimmers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wickedly approach thy household,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor unworthily, thy servants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor thy courts with indiscretion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy dwellings sing good manners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy walls re-echo virtue.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After mind the hero searches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the best of men seek honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek for honesty and wisdom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thy home should be immoral,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thine inmates fail in virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then thy gray-beards would be black-dogs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In sheep’s clothing at thy firesides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy women would be witches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wicked witches in thy chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy brothers be as serpents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crawling through thy husband’s mansion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy sisters would be famous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their evil thoughts and conduct.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Equal honors must be given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy husband’s friends and kindred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lower must thy head be bended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than within thy mother’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than within thy father’s guest-room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou didst thy kindred honor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever strive to give good counsel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wear a countenance of sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear a head upon thy shoulders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with wise and ancient sayings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open bright thine eyes at morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To behold the silver sunrise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharpen well thine ears at evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to hear the rooster crowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he makes his second calling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway thou must rise from slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the aged sleep in quiet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should the rooster fail to call thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the moonbeams touch thine eyelids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the Great Bear be thy keeper;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often go thou and consult them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call upon the Moon for counsel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask the Bear for ancient wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the stars divine thy future;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Great Bear faces southward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When his tail is pointing northward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is time to break with slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seek for fire within the ashes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Place a spark upon the tinder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow the fire through all the fuel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If no spark is in the ashes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then go wake thy hero-husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak these words to him on waking:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Give me fire, O my beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give a single spark, my husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike a little fire from flint-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let it fall upon my tinder.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“From the spark, O Bride of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light thy fires, and heat thine ovens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the holder, place the torch-light,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find thy pathway to the stables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to fill the empty mangers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thy husband’s cows be lowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thy brother’s steeds be neighing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the cows await thy coming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the steeds for thee are calling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten, stooping through the hurdles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten through the yards and stables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed thy husband’s cows with pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed with care the gentle lambkins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give the cows the best of clover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hay, and barley, to the horses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed the calves of lowing mothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed the fowl that fly to meet thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Never rest upon the haymow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never sleep within the hurdles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the kine are fed and tended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the flocks have all been watered;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten thence, my pretty matron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the snow-flakes to thy dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There a crying babe awaits thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weeping in his couch neglected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot speak and tell his troubles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speechless babe, and weeping infant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot say that he is hungry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether pain or cold distresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greets with joy his mother’s footsteps.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Afterward repair in silence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy husband’s rooms and presence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Early visit thou his chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy hand a golden pitcher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thine arm a broom of birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy teeth a lighted taper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thyself the fourth in order.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweep thou then thy hero’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dust his benches and his tables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wash the flooring well with water.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If the baby of thy sister</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play alone within his corner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show the little child attention,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bathe his eyes and smoothe his ringlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give the infant needed comforts;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou have no bread of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his hand adjust some trinket.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Lastly, when the week has ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give thy house a thorough cleansing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Benches, tables, walls, and ceilings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What of dust is on the windows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweep away with broom of birch-twigs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy rooms must first be sprinkled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the dust may not be scattered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not fill the halls and chambers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweep the dust from every crevice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thou not a single atom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Also sweep the chimney-corners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not then forget the rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest thy home should seem untidy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest thy dwelling seem neglected.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear, O maiden, what I tell thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn the tenor of my teaching:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never dress in scanty raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy robes be plain and comely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever wear the whitest linen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy feet wear tidy fur-shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the glory of thy husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the honor of thy hero.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tend thou well the sacred sorb-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guard the mountain-ashes planted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the court-yard, widely branching;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful the mountain-ashes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful their leaves and flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still more beautiful the berries.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the exiled one demonstrates</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she lives to please her husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tries to make her hero happy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Like the mouse, have ears for hearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the hare, have feet for running,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend thy neck and turn thy visage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the juniper and aspen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to watch with care thy goings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to guard thy feet from stumbling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou mayest walk in safety.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When thy brother comes from plowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy father from his garners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy husband from the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his chopping, thy beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to each a water-basin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to each a linen-towel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak to each some pleasant greeting.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When thy second mother hastens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy husband’s home and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her hand a corn-meal measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste thou to the court to meet her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy-hearted, bow before her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take the measure from her fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy, bear it to thy husband.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If thou shouldst not see distinctly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What demands thy next attention,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask at once thy hero’s mother:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Second mother, my beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Name the task to be accomplished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thy willing second daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me how to best perform it.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This should be the mother’s answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘This the manner of thy workings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus thy daily work accomplish:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stamp with diligence and courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grind with will and great endurance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set the millstones well in order,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill the barley-pans with water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knead with strength the dough for baking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Place the fagots on the fireplace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy ovens may be heated,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bake in love the honey-biscuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bake the larger loaves of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rinse to cleanliness thy platters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polish well thy drinking-vessels.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If thou hearest from the mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the mother of thy husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the cask for meal is empty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take the barley from the garners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten to the rooms for grinding.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou grindest in the chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not sing in glee and joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn the grinding-stones in silence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the mill give up thy singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the side-holes furnish music;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not sigh as if unhappy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not groan as if in trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the father think thee weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest thy husband’s mother fancy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy groans mean discontentment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy sighing means displeasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly sift the flour thou grindest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take it to the casks in buckets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bake thy hero’s bread with pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knead the dough with care and patience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy biscuits may be worthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the dough be light and airy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shouldst thou see a bucket empty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take the bucket on thy shoulder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thine arm a silver-dipper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten off to fill with water</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the crystal river flowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gracefully thy bucket carry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear it firmly by the handles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten houseward like the zephyrs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten like the air of autumn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not tarry near the streamlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the waters do not linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the father may not fancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the ancient dame imagine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast beheld thine image,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast admired thy form and features,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast admired thy grace and beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the mirror of the fountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the crystal streamlet’s eddies.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shouldst thou journey to the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to gather aspen-fagots,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not go with noise and bustle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather all thy sticks in silence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather quietly the birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the father may not fancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mother not imagine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy calling came from anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy noise from discontentment.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If thou goest to the storehouse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To obtain the flour of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not tarry on thy journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the threshold do not linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the father may not fancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mother not imagine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the meal thou hast divided</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the women of the village.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If thou goest to the river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to wash thy birchen platters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to cleanse thy pans and buckets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest thy work be done in neatness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rinse the sides, and rinse the handles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rinse thy pitchers to perfection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spoons, and forks, and knives, and goblets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rinse with care thy cooking-vessels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closely watch the food-utensils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the dogs may not deface them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the kittens may not mar them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the eagles may not steal them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the children may not break them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many children in the village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many little heads and fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will need thy careful watching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest they steal the things of value.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When thou goest to thy bathing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have the brushes ready lying</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the bath-room clean and smokeless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not, linger in the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy bathing do not tarry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the father may not fancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mother not imagine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art sleeping on the benches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolling in the laps of comfort.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“From thy bath, when thou returnest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his bathing tempt the father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak to him the words that follow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Father of my hero-husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clean are all the bath-room benches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everything in perfect order;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go and bathe for thine enjoyment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pour the water all-sufficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will lend thee needed service.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When the time has come for spinning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the hours arrive for weaving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not ask the help of others,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look not in the stream for knowledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For advice ask not the servants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the spindle from the sisters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the weaving-comb from strangers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou thyself must do the spinning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thine own hand ply the shuttle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loosely wind the skeins of wool-yarn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tightly wind the balls of flax-thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wind them deftly in the shuttle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fit the warp upon the rollers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat the woof and warp together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly ply the weaver’s shuttle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weave good cloth for all thy vestments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weave of woolen, webs for dresses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the finest wool of lambkins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One thread only in thy weaving.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear thou what I now advise thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brew thy beer from early barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the barley’s new-grown kernels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brew it with the magic virtues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Malt it with the sweets of honey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not stir it with the birch-rod,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stir it with thy skilful fingers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou goest to the garners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not let the seed bring evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep the dogs outside the brew-house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no fear of wolves in hunger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the wild-beasts of the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou goest to thy brewing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou wander forth at midnight.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should some stranger come to see thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not worry for his comfort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever does the worthy household</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have provisions for the stranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bits of meat, and bread, and biscuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ample for the dinner-table;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seat the stranger in thy dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak with him in friendly accents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entertain the guest with kindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his dinner is preparing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the stranger leaves thy threshold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When his farewell has been spoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead him only to the portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not step without the doorway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy husband may not fancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mother not imagine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast interest in strangers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shouldst thou ever make a journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the centre of the village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to gain some needed object,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thou speakest in the hamlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy words be full of wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou shamest not thy kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor disgrace thy husband’s household.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Village-maidens oft will ask thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mothers of the hamlet question:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Does thy husband’s mother greet thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in childhood thou wert greeted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy happy home in Pohya?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not answer in negation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Say that she has always given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thee the best of her provisions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given thee the kindest greetings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though it be but once a season.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Listen well to what I tell thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou goest from thy father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy husband’s distant dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must not forget thy mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her that gave thee life and beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her that nurtured thee in childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many sleepless nights she nursed thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often were her wants neglected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Numberless the times she rocked thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tender, true, and ever faithful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the mother to her daughter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She that can forget her mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can neglect the one that nursed her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should not visit Mana’s castle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the kingdom of Tuoni;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Manala she would suffer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffer frightful retribution,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should her mother be forgotten;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should her dear one be neglected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mana’s daughters will torment her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And Tuoni’s sons revile her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will ask her much as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘How couldst thou forget thy mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How neglect the one that nursed thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great the pain thy mother suffered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great the trouble that thou gavest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thy loving mother brought thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into life for good or evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she gave thee earth-existence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she nursed thee but an infant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she fed thee in thy childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she taught thee what thou knowest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mana’s punishments upon thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thy mother is forgotten!’ ”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the floor a witch was sitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the fire a beggar-woman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One that knew the ways of people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words the woman uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thus the crow calls in the winter:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Would that I could be a singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my voice be full of sweetness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, alas! my songs are worthless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot charm the weakest creature;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must live without the singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the songs to the musicians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those that live in golden houses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the homes of the beloved;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeless therefore I must wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a beggar in the corn-fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with none to do me honor.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hear now, sister, what I tell thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter thou thy husband’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow not his mind, nor fancies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As my husband’s mind I followed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a flower was I when budding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprouting like a rose in spring-time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Growing like a slender maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the honey-gem of glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the playmates of my childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the goslings of my father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the blue-ducks of my mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like my brother’s water-younglings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the bullfinch of my sister;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew I like the heather-flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the berry of the meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played upon the sandy sea-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocked upon the fragrant upland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang all day adown the valley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrilled with song the hill and mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with mirth the glen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived and frolicked in the woodlands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Into traps are foxes driven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the cruel pangs of hunger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into traps, the cunning ermine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus are maidens wooed and wedded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their hunger for a husband.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus created is the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus intended is the daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Subject to her hero-husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Subject also to his mother.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then to other fields I hastened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a berry from the border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a cranberry for roasting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a strawberry for dinner;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the elm-trees seemed to wound me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the aspens tried to cut me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the willows tried to seize me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the forest tried to slay me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I journeyed to my husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I travelled to his dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was conducted to his mother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then there were, as was reported,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six compartments built of pine-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twelve the number of the chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mansion filled with garrets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Studding all the forest border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every by-way filled with flowers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streamlets bordered fields of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with wheat and corn, the islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grain in plenty in the garners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rye unthrashed in great abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Countless sums of gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other treasures without number.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my journey I had ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my hand at last was given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six supports were in his cabin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven poles as rails for fencing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with anger were the bushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the glens disfavor showing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the walks were lined with trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil-tempered were the forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hundred words of evil import,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hundred others of unkindness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not let this bring me sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long I sought to merit praises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long I hoped to find some favor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strove most earnestly for kindness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they led me to the cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There I tried some chips to gather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knocked my head against the portals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my husband’s lowly dwelling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“At the door were eyes of strangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sable eyes at the partition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Green with envy in his cabin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil heroes in the back-ground,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From each mouth the fire was streaming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From each tongue the sparks out-flying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying from my second father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his eyeballs of unkindness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not let this bring me trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tried to live in peace and pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the homestead of my husband;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In humility I suffered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skipped about with feet of rabbit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew along with steps of ermine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Late I laid my head to slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Early rose as if a servant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not win a touch of kindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not merit love nor honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I had dislodged the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the rocks had I torn open.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then I turned the heavy millstone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ground the flour with care and trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ground the barley-grains in patience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the mother might be nourished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That her fury-throat might swallow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What might please her taste and fancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her gold-enamelled platters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the corner of her table.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As for me, the hapless daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my flour was from the siftings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the table near the oven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ate I from the birchen ladle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oftentimes I brought the mosses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered in the lowland meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baked them into loaves for eating;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the water from the river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thirsty, sipped it from the dipper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ate of fish the worst in Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only smelts, and worthless swimmers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocking in my boat of birch-bark;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never ate I fish or biscuit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my second mother’s fingers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Blades I gathered in the summers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twisted barley-stalks in winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the laborers of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the servants sold in bondage.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the thresh-house of my husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evermore to me was given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flail the heaviest and longest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And to me the longest lever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shore the strongest beater,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the largest rake in haying;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one thought my burden heavy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one thought that I could suffer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the best of heroes faltered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the strongest women weakened.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus did I, a youthful housewife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the right time, all my duties,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drenched myself in perspiration,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoped for better times to follow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I only rose to labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing neither rest nor pleasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was blamed by all the household,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With ungrateful tongues derided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now about my awkward manners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now about my reputation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Censuring my name and station.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Words unkind were heaped upon me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell like hail on me unhappy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the frightful flash of lightning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the heavy hail of spring-time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I did not despair entirely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would have lived to labor longer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the tongue of malice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the old-one spoiled my temper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roused my deepest ire and hatred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then my husband grew a wild-bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew a savage wolf of Hisi.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Only then I turned to weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And reflected in my chamber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought of all my former pleasures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the happy days of childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my father’s joyful firesides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my mother’s peaceful cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then began I thus to murmur:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Well thou knowest, ancient mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to make thy sweet bud blossom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to train thy tender shootlet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not know where to ingraft it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed, alas! the little scion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the very worst of places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On an unproductive hillock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hardest limb of cherry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where it could not grow and flourish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to waste its life, in weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hapless in her lasting sorrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthier had been my conduct,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the regions that are better,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the court-yards that are wider,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In compartments that are larger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living with a loving husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living with a stronger hero.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoe of birch-bark was my suitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoe of Laplanders, my husband;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had the body of a raven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Voice and visage like the jackdaw,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mouth and claws were from the black-wolf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The remainder from the wild-bear.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had I known that mine affianced</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was a fount of pain and evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hill-side I had wandered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been a pine-tree on the highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Been a linden on the border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the black-earth made my visage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grown a beard of ugly bristles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Head of loam and eyes of lightning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my ears the knots of birches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my limbs the trunks of aspens.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“This the manner of my singing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hearing of my husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I sang my cares and murmurs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus my hero near the portals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the wail of my displeasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he hastened to my chamber;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway knew I by his footsteps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well concluded he was angry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew it by his steps implanted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the winds were still in slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yet his sable locks stood endwise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fluttered round his head in fury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his horrid mouth stood open;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To and fro his eyes were rolling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one hand a branch of willow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the other, club of alder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck at me with might of malice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aimed the cudgel at my forehead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When the evening had descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my husband thought of slumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took he in his hand a whip-stalk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a whip-lash made of deer-skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not made for any other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only made for me unhappy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When at last I begged for mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I sought a place for resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his side I courted slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merciless, my husband seized me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck me with his arm of envy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beat me with the whip of torture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deer-skin-lash and stalk of birch-wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his couch I leaped impulsive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the coldest night of winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the husband fleetly followed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught me at the outer portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasped me by my streaming tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tore my ringlets from my forehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast in curls upon the night-winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the freezing winds of winter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the aid that I could ask for,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who could free me from my torment?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made I shoes of magic metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made the straps of steel and copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waited long without the dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long I listened at the portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping he would end his ravings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping he would sink to slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he did not seek for resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not wish to still his fury.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finally the cold benumbed me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As an outcast from his cabin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I was forced to walk and wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I, freezing, well reflected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the substance of my thinking:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I will not endure this torture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not bear this thing forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not bear this cruel treatment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such contempt I will not suffer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the wicked tribe of Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this nest of evil Piru.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then I said, ‘Farewell forever!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my husband’s home and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my much-loved home and husband;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Started forth upon a journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my father’s distant hamlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over swamps and over snow-fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandered over towering mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over hills and through the valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my brother’s welcome meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my sister’s home and birthplace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There were rustling withered pine-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finely-feathered firs were fading,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Countless ravens there were cawing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the jackdaws harshly singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the chorus of the ravens:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Thou hast here a home no longer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is not the happy homestead</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy merry days of childhood.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Heeding not this woodland chorus,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straight I journeyed to the dwelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my childhood’s friend and brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the portals spake in concord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hills and valleys answered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This their saddened song and echo:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Wherefore dost thou journey hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comest thou for joy or sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy father’s old dominions?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here unhappiness awaits thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long departed is thy father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead and gone to visit Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dead and gone thy faithful mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy brother is a stranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his wife is chill and heartless!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Heeding not these many warnings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway to my brother’s cottage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were my weary feet directed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid my hand upon the door-latch</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my brother’s dismal cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the latch was cold and lifeless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I wandered to the chamber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I waited at the doorway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There I saw the heartless hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she did not give me greeting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not give her hand in welcome;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud, alas! was I unhappy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not make the first advances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not offer her my friendship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my hand I did not proffer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid my hand upon the oven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All its former warmth departed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the coal I laid my fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the latent heat had left it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rest-bench lay my brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay outstretched before the fireplace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaps of soot upon his shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heaps of ashes on his forehead.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the brother asked the stranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Questioned thus his guest politely:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Tell me what thy name and station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence thou comest o’er the waters!’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer that I gave him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Hast thou then forgot thy sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does my brother not remember,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not recall his mother’s daughter?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We are children of one mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of one bird were we the fledgelings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one nest were hatched and nurtured.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then the brother fell to weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his eyes great tear-drops flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his wife the brother whispered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whispered thus unto the housewife:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Bring thou beer to give my sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quench her thirst and cheer her spirits.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Full of envy, brought the sister</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only water filled with evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water for the infant’s eyelids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soap and water from the bath-room.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“To his wife the brother whispered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whispered thus unto the housewife:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Bring thou salmon for my sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my sister so long absent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to still her pangs of hunger.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thereupon the wife obeying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought, in envy, only cabbage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the children had been eating,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the house-dogs had been licking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leavings of the black-dog’s breakfast.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then I left my brother’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to the ancient homestead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my mother’s home deserted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward, onward did I wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened onward by the cold-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged my body on in anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cottage-doors of strangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the unfamiliar portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the care of the neglected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the needy of the village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the children poor and orphaned.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“There are many wicked people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many slanderers of women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many women evil-minded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That malign their sex through envy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many they with lips of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That belie the best of maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Prove the innocent are guilty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the worst of misdemeanors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak aloud in tones unceasing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak, alas! with wicked motives,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread the follies of their neighbors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the tongues of self-pollution.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Very few, indeed, the people</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will feed the poor and hungry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will bid the stranger welcome;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Very few to treat her kindly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Innocent, and lone, and needy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Few to offer her a shelter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the chilling storms of winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When her skirts with ice are stiffened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coats of ice her only raiment!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Never in my days of childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in my maiden lifetime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never would believe the story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though a hundred tongues had told it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though a thousand voices sang it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That such evil things could happen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That such misery could follow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such misfortune could befall one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who has tried to do her duty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who has tried to live uprightly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tried to make her people happy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus the young bride was instructed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauteous Maiden of the Rainbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus by Osmotar, the teacher.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
