<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XLIX: Restoration of the Sun and Moon</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-49" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Restoration of the Sun and Moon</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Thus has Fire returned to Northland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the gold Moon is not shining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither gleams the silver sunlight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the chambers of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the plains of Kalevala.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the crops the white-frost settled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cattle died of hunger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even birds grew sick and perished.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men and maidens, faint and famished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perished in the cold and darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the absence of the sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the absence of the moonlight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew the pike his holes and hollows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the eagle knew his highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew the winds the times for sailing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the wise men of the Northland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not know the dawn of morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fog-point in the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the islands forest-covered.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Young and aged talked and wondered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well reflected, long debated,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to live without the moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Live without the silver sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cold and cheerless Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the homes of Kalevala.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long conjectured all the maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Orphans asked the wise for counsel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spake a maid to Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Running to the blacksmith’s furnace:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rise, O artist, from thy slumbers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten from thy couch unworthy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge from gold the Moon for Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge anew the Sun from silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot live without the moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor without the silver sunshine!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From his couch arose the artist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his couch of stone, the blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And began his work of forging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forging Sun and Moon for Northland.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Came the ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the doorway sat and lingered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blacksmith, my beloved brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou the only metal-worker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me why thy magic hammer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falls so heavy on thine anvil?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the youthful Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Moon of gold and Sun of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am forging for Wainola;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall swing them into ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plant them in the starry heavens.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the wise, old Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Senseless blacksmith of the ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly dost thou swing thy hammer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly rings thy mighty anvil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver will not gleam as sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not of gold is born the moonlight!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, little heeding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceases not to ply his hammer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sun and Moon the artist forges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wings the Moon of Magic upward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurls it to the pine-tree branches;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does not shine without her master.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the silver Sun he stations</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an elm-tree on the mountain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his forehead drip the sweat-drops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perspiration from his fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through his labors at the anvil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the Sun and Moon were forging;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Sun shone not at morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his station in the elm-tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Moon shone not at evening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the pine-tree’s topmost branches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let the Fates be now consulted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the oracles examined;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only thus may we discover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Sun and Moon lie hidden.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only wise and true magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut three chips from trunks of alder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid the chips in magic order,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched and turned them with his fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words of master-magic:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of my Maker seek I knowledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask in hope and faith the answer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the great magician, Ukko:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tongue of alder, tell me truly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Symbol of the great Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Sun and Moon are sleeping;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Moon shines not in season,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor appears the Sun at midday,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their stations in the sky-vault.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak the truth, O magic alder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak not words of man, nor hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither bring but truthful measures.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us form a sacred compact:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou speakest me a falsehood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will hurl thee to Manala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the nether fires consume thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thine evil signs may perish.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the alder answered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words of truthful import:</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Verily the Sun lies hidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the golden Moon is sleeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the stone-berg of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the copper-bearing mountain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I shall go at once to Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cold and dark Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring the Sun and Moon to gladden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All Wainola’s fields and forests.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Forth he hastens on his journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dismal Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Northland cold and dreary;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travels one day, then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the third from morn till evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When appear the gates of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her snow-clad hills and mountains.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the river of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loudly calls the ferry-maiden:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bring a boat, O Pohya-daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring a strong and trusty vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Row me o’er these chilling waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er this rough and rapid river!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the ferry-maiden heard not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not listen to his calling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid a pile of well-dried brushwood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knots and needles of the fir-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made a fire beside the river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent the black smoke into heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curling to the home of Ukko.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to her chamber window,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked upon the bay and river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to her attendants:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why the fire across the river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the current meets the deep-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smaller than the fires of foemen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larger than the flames of hunters?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon a Pohyalander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened from the court of Louhi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the cause he might discover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring the sought-for information</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hostess of Pohyola;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw upon the river-border</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some great hero from Wainola.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen saw the stranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called again in tones of thunder:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bring a skiff, thou son of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the minstrel, Wainamoinen!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the Pohyalander answered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here no skiffs are lying idle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Row thyself across the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Use thine arms, and feet, and fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To propel thee o’er the river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the sacred stream of Pohya.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, long reflecting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bravely thus soliloquizes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will change my form and features,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will assume a second body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither man, nor ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Master of the Northland waters!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the singer, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped, a pike, upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly swam the rapid river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gained the frigid Pohya-border.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There his native form resuming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked he as a mighty hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dismal isle of Louhi.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the wicked sons of Northland:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come thou to Pohyola’s court-room.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To Pohyola’s court he hastened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again the sons of evil:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come thou to the halls of Louhi!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To Pohyola’s halls he hastened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the latch he laid his fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set his foot within the fore-hall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to the inner chamber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the painted rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Northland-heroes gather.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There he found the Pohya-masters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girded with their swords of battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their spears and battle-axes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their fatal bows and arrows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the death of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient bard, Suwantolainen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus they asked the hero-stranger:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Magic swimmer of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of evil, what the message</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou bringest from thy people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What thy mission to Pohyola?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the hosts of Louhi:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For the Sun I come to Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to seek the Moon in Pohya;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me where the Sun lies hidden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the golden Moon is sleeping.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the evil sons of Pohya:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Both the Sun and Moon are hidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rock of many colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the copper-bearing mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a cavern iron-banded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the stone-berg of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevermore to gain their freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevermore to shine in Northland!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the hero, Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If the Sun be not uncovered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the Moon leave not her dungeon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will challenge all Pohyola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the test of spear or broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us now our weapons measure!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick the hero of Wainola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew his mighty sword of magic;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On its border shone the moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On its hilt the Sun was shining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On its back, a neighing stallion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On its face a cat was mewing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful his magic weapon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the hero-swords are tested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blades are rightly measured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen’s sword is longest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a single grain of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a blade of straw, the widest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the court-yard rushed the heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to the deadly combat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the plains of Sariola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes one blow, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes a third time, cuts and conquers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the house-maids slice the turnips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they lop the heads of cabbage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the stalks of flax are broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the heads of Louhi’s heroes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall before the magic broadsword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the ancient Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the victor from Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient bard and great magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to find the Sun in slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the golden Moon discover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the copper-bearing mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cavern iron-banded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the stone-berg of Pohyola.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>He had gone but little distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he found a sea-green island;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the island stood a birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the birch-tree stood a pillar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carved in stone of many colors;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the pillar, nine large portals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bolted in a hundred places;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rock he found a crevice</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sending forth a gleam of sunlight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick he drew his mighty broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the pillar struck three colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the magic of his weapon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pillar fell asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three the number of the fragments.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and faithful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the crevice looked and wondered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the center of the pillar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a scarlet-colored basin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noxious serpents beer were drinking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the adders eating spices.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Therefore has Pohyola’s hostess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little drink to give to strangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since her beer is drank by serpents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her spices given to adders.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick he draws his magic fire-blade,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cuts the vipers green in pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lops the heads off all the adders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words of master-magic:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thus, hereafter, let the serpent</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink the famous beer of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feed upon the Northland-spices!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal wizard-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought to open wide the portals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the hands and words of magic;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his hands had lost their cunning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his magic gone to others.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the ancient minstrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick returning, heavy-hearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his native halls and hamlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed his brother-heroes:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woman, he without his weapons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With no implements, a weakling!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sun and Moon have I discovered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I could not force the portals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading to their rocky cavern</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the copper-bearing mountain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the reckless Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why was I not taken with thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To become thy war-companion?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would have been of goodly service,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would have drawn the bolts or broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the portals to the cavern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Sun and Moon lie hidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the copper-bearing mountain!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus replied to Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Empty words will break no portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw no bolts of any moment;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Locks and bolts are never broken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the words of little wisdom!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greater means than thou commandest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must be used to free the sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free the moonlight from her dungeon.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, not discouraged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to the forge and smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou famous metal-artist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge for me a magic trident,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge from steel a dozen stout-rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Master-keys, a goodly number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iron bars and heavy hammers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the Sun we may uncover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the copper-bearing mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the stone-berg of Pohyola.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal metal-worker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forged the needs of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forged for him the magic trident,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forged from steel a dozen stout-rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Master-keys, a goodly number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iron bars and heavy hammers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the largest, nor the smallest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forged them of the right dimensions.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland’s old and toothless wizard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fastened wings upon her shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As an eagle, sailed the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over field, and fen, and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over Pohya’s many waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hamlets of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the forge of Ilmarinen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick the famous metal-worker</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to see if winds were blowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the winds at peace and silent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found an eagle, sable-colored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perched upon his window-casement.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Magic bird, whom art thou seeking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why art sitting at my window?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the eagle:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Art thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal iron-forger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Master of the magic metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland’s wonder-working artist?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen gave this answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There is nothing here of wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I forged the dome of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forged the earth a concave cover!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again the magic eagle:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why this ringing of thine anvil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why this knocking of thy hammer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me what thy hands are forging?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the blacksmith:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis a collar I am forging</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the neck of wicked Louhi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toothless witch of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stealer of the silver sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stealer of the golden moonlight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this collar I shall bind her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the iron-rock of Ehstland!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw misfortune fast approaching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw destruction flying over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the signs of bad-luck lower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly winged her way through ether</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her native halls and chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the darksome Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There unlocked the massive portals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Sun and Moon were hidden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rock of many colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cavern iron-banded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the copper-bearing mountain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then again the wicked Louhi</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changed her withered form and features,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And became a dove of good-luck;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway winged the starry heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over field, and fen, and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the meadows of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the plains of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the forge of Ilmarinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the question of the blacksmith:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore comest, dove of good-luck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the tidings that thou bringest?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the magic bird made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore come I to thy smithy?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to bring the joyful tidings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the Sun has left his cavern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left the rock of many colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left the stone-berg of Pohyola;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the Moon no more is hidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the copper-bearing mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the caverns iron-banded.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Straightway hastened Ilmarinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the threshold of his smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly scanned the far horizon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw again the silver sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw once more the golden moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing peace, and joy, and plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the homes of Kalevala.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the blacksmith hastened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his brother, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to the magician:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou ancient bard and minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal wizard-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See, the Sun again is shining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the golden Moon is beaming</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their long-neglected places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their stations in the sky-vault!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and faithful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway hastened to the court-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked upon the far horizon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw once more the silver sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw again the golden moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing peace, and joy, and plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the people of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the minstrel spake these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Greetings to thee, Sun of fortune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greetings to thee, Moon of good-luck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome sunshine, welcome moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden is the dawn of morning!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free art thou, O Sun of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free again, O Moon beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the sacred cuckoo’s singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the ring-dove’s liquid cooings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Rise, thou silver Sun, each morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Source of light and life hereafter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring us, daily, joyful greetings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill our homes with peace and plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That our sowing, fishing, hunting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be prospered by thy coming.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travel on thy daily journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the Moon be ever with thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glide along thy way rejoicing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>End thy journeyings in slumber;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest at evening in the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the daily cares have ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the good of all thy people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the pleasure of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the joy of Kalevala!”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
