<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune IX: Origin of Iron</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Origin of Iron</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, thus encouraged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly rises in his snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asking no one for assistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway hastens to the cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes a seat within the dwelling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come two maids with silver pitchers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing also golden goblets;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dip they up a very little,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the very smallest measure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the blood of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wounds of Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From the fireplace calls the old man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the gray-beard asks the minstrel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tell me who thou art of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who of all the great magicians?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lo! thy blood fills seven sea-boats,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eight of largest birchen vessels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowing from some hero’s veinlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wounds of some magician.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other matters I would ask thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing the cause of this thy trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing to me the source of metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing the origin of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How at first it was created.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made this answer to the gray-beard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Know I well the source of metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know the origin of iron;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can tell how steel is fashioned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the mothers air is oldest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water is the oldest brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fire is second brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the youngest brother, iron;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko is the first creator.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko, maker of the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut apart the air and water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere was born the metal, iron.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko, maker of the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firmly rubbed his hands together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firmly pressed them on his knee-cap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then arose three lovely maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three most beautiful of daughters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These were mothers of the iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of steel of bright-blue color.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tremblingly they walked the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked the clouds with silver linings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their bosoms overflowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the milk of future iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowing on and flowing ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the bright rims of the cloudlets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the earth, the valleys filling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the slumber-calling waters.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ukko’s eldest daughter sprinkled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black milk over river channels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the second daughter sprinkled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White milk over hills and mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the youngest daughter sprinkled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red milk over seas and oceans.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the black milk had been sprinkled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew the dark and ductile iron;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the white milk had been sprinkled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew the iron, lighter-colored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the red milk had been sprinkled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew the red and brittle iron.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“After Time had gone a distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iron hastened Fire to visit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beloved elder brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to know his brother better.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway Fire began his roarings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labored to consume his brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His beloved younger brother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway Iron sees his danger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saves himself by fleetly fleeing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fiery flame’s advances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleeing hither, fleeing thither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleeing still and taking shelter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the swamps and in the valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the springs that loudly bubble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the rivers winding seaward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the broad backs of the marshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the swans their nests have builded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the wild geese hatch their goslings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus is iron in the swamp-lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretching by the water-courses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hidden well for many ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hidden in the birchen forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he could not hide forever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the searchings of his brother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here and there the fire has caught him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught and brought him to his furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the spears, and swords, and axes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might be forged and duly hammered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the swamps ran blackened waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the heath the bears came ambling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wolves ran through the marshes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iron then made his appearance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the feet of wolves had trodden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the paws of bears had trampled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to earth to work the metal;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He was born upon the Coal-mount,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skilled and nurtured in the coal-fields;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one hand, a copper hammer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the other, tongs of iron;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the night was born the blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the morn he built his smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought with care a favored hillock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the winds might fill his bellows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found a hillock in the swamp-lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the iron hid abundant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There he built his smelting furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There he laid his leathern bellows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened where the wolves had travelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Followed where the bears had trampled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the iron’s young formations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the wolf-tracks of the marshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the foot-prints of the gray-bear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the sleeping iron:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Thou most useful of the metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art sleeping in the marshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art hid in low conditions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the wolf treads in the swamp-lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the bear sleeps in the thickets.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou thought and well considered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What would be thy future station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should I place thee in the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to make thee free and useful?’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then was Iron sorely frightened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much distressed and filled with horror,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When of Fire he heard the mention,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mention of his fell destroyer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Then again speaks Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the smith addresses Iron:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Be not frightened, useful metal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely Fire will not consume thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not burn his youngest brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not harm his nearest kindred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thou to my room and furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the fire is freely burning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt live, and grow, and prosper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt become the swords of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buckles for the belts of women.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ere arose the star of evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Iron ore had left the marshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the water-beds had risen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been carried to the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fire the smith had laid it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid it in his smelting furnace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen starts the bellows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives three motions of the handle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the iron flows in streamlets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the forge of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon becomes like baker’s leaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft as dough for bread of barley.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then out-screamed the metal, Iron:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Wondrous blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take, O take me from thy furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this fire and cruel torture.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ilmarinen thus made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I will take thee from my furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Thou art but a little frightened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt be a mighty power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt slay the best of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt wound thy dearest brother.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Straightway Iron made this promise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vowed and swore in strongest accents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the furnace, by the anvil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the tongs, and by the hammer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words he vowed and uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Many trees that I shall injure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall devour the hearts of mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not slay my nearest kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not kill the best of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not wound my dearest brother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better live in civil freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happier would be my lifetime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should I serve my fellow-beings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Serve as tools for their convenience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than as implements of warfare,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slay my friends and nearest kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wound the children of my mother.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now the master, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The renowned and skilful blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fire removes the iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Places it upon the anvil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammers well until it softens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammers many fine utensils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammers spears, and swords, and axes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammers knives, and forks, and hatchets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammers tools of all descriptions.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Many things the blacksmith needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many things he could not fashion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not make the tongue of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not hammer steel from iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not make the iron harden.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well considered Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeply thought and long reflected.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he gathered birchen ashes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steeped the ashes in the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made a lye to harden iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to form the steel most needful.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his tongue he tests the mixture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weighs it long and well considers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blacksmith speaks as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘All this labor is for nothing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not fashion steel from iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not make the soft ore harden.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now a bee flies from the meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blue-wing coming from the flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies about, then safely settles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the furnace of the smithy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus the smith the bee addresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Little bee, thou tiny birdling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring me honey on thy winglets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy tongue, I pray thee, bring me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweetness from the fragrant meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the little cups of flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the tips of seven petals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we thus may aid the water</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To produce the steel from iron.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Evil Hisi’s bird, the hornet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard these words of Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking from the cottage gable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying to the bark of birch-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the iron bars were heating,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the steel was being tempered;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly flew the stinging hornet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered all the Hisi horrors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the blessing of the serpent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the venom of the adder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the poison of the spider,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the stings of all the insects,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mixed them with the ore and water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the steel was being tempered.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ilmarinen, skilful blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First of all the iron-workers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought the bee had surely brought him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey from the fragrant meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the little cups of flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the tips of seven petals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he spake the words that follow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Welcome, welcome, is thy coming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honeyed sweetness from the flowers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast brought to aid the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to form the steel from iron!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ilmarinen, ancient blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dipped the iron into water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water mixed with many poisons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought it but the wild bee’s honey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus he formed the steel from iron.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he plunged it into water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water mixed with many poisons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he placed it in the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Angry grew the hardened iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke the vow that he had taken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ate his words like dogs and devils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mercilessly cut his brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Madly raged against his kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caused the blood to flow in streamlets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wounds of man and hero.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, the origin of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of steel of light blue color.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>From the hearth arose the gray-beard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook his heavy locks and answered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now I know the source of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the steel and whence its evils;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curses on thee, cruel iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curses on the steel thou givest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curses on thee, tongue of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cursed be thy life forever!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once thou wert of little value,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having neither form nor beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither strength nor great importance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When in form of milk thou rested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When for ages thou wert hidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the breasts of God’s three daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hidden in their heaving bosoms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the borders of the cloudlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the blue vault of the heavens.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou wert once of little value,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having neither form nor beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither strength nor great importance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When like water thou wert resting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the broad back of the marshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the steep declines of mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou wert but formless matter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only dust of rusty color.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Surely thou wert void of greatness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Having neither strength nor beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the moose was trampling on thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the roebuck trod upon thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the tracks of wolves were in thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bear-paws scratched thy body.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely thou hadst little value</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the skilful Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First of all the iron-workers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought thee from the blackened swamp-lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took thee to his ancient smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed thee in his fiery furnace.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Truly thou hadst little vigor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little strength, and little danger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou in the fire wert hissing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolling forth like seething water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the furnace of the smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou gavest oath the strongest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the furnace, by the anvil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the tongs, and by the hammer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the dwelling of the blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the fire within the furnace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now forsooth thou hast grown mighty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst rage in wildest fury;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast broken all thy pledges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy solemn vows hast broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the dogs thou shamest honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shamest both thyself and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tainted all with breath of evil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell who drove thee to this mischief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell who taught thee all thy malice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell who gavest thee thine evil!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did thy father, or thy mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did the eldest of thy brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did the youngest of thy sisters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did the worst of all thy kindred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to thee thine evil nature?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not thy father, nor thy mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the eldest of thy brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the youngest of thy sisters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the worst of all thy kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But thyself hast done this mischief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou the cause of all our trouble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and view thine evil doings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And amend this flood of damage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere I tell thy gray-haired mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere I tell thine aged father.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great indeed a mother’s anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great indeed a father’s sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a son does something evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a child runs wild and lawless.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Crimson streamlet, cease thy flowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wounds of Wainamoinen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood of ages, stop thy coursing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the veins of the magician;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand like heaven’s crystal pillars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand like columns in the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand like birch-trees in the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the tall reeds in the marshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the high-rocks on the sea-coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand by power of mighty magic!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should perforce thy will impel thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow thou on thine endless circuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the veins of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the bones, and through the muscles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the lungs, and heart, and liver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the mighty sage and singer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better be the food of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to waste thy strength and virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the meadows and the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And be lost in dust and ashes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow forever in thy circle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must cease this crimson out-flow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stain no more the grass and flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stain no more these golden hill-tops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride and beauty of our heroes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the veins of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the heart of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is thy rightful home and storehouse.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither now withdraw thy forces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither hasten, swiftly flowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow no more as crimson currents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill no longer crimson lakelets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must not rush like brooks in spring-tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor meander like the rivers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Cease thy flow, by word of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cease as did the falls of Tyrya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the rivers of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the sky withheld her rain-drops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the sea gave up her waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the famine of the seasons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the years of fire and torture.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou heedest not this order,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall offer other measures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Know I well of other forces;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall call the Hisi irons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In them I shall boil and roast thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to check thy crimson flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to save the wounded hero.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If these means be inefficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should these measures prove unworthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall call omniscient Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mightiest of the creators,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stronger than all ancient heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wiser than the world-magicians;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will check the crimson out-flow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will heal this wound of hatchet.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ukko, God of love and mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God and Master of the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thou hither, thou art needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thou quickly I beseech thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lend thy hand to aid thy children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch this wound with healing fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stop this hero’s streaming life-blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bind this wound with tender leaflets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mingle with them healing flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to check this crimson current,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to save this great magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save the life of Wainamoinen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus at last the blood-stream ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the magic words were spoken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the gray-beard, much rejoicing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent his young son to the smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to make a healing balsam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the herbs of tender fibre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the healing plants and flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the stalks secreting honey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the roots, and leaves, and blossoms.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the way he meets an oak-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the oak the son addresses:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hast thou honey in thy branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does thy sap run full of sweetness?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the oak-tree wisely answers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea, but last night dripped the honey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down upon my spreading branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the clouds their fragrance sifted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sifted honey on my leaflets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their home within the heavens.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the son takes oak-wood splinters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes the youngest oak-tree branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathers many healing grasses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathers many herbs and flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rarest herbs that grow in Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Places them within the furnace</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a kettle made of copper;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lets them steep and boil together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bits of bark chipped from the oak-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many herbs of healing virtues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steeps them one day, then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three long days of summer weather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Days and nights in quick succession;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he tries his magic balsam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks to see if it is ready,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If his remedy is finished;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the balsam is unworthy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then he added other grasses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Herbs of every healing virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That were brought from distant nations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many hundred leagues from Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered by the wisest minstrels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither brought by nine enchanters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three days more he steeped the balsam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three nights more the fire he tended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine the days and nights he watched it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then again he tried the ointment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Viewed it carefully and tested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found at last that it was ready,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the magic balm was finished.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Near by stood a branching birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the border of the meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wickedly it had been broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broken down by evil Hisi;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick he takes his balm of healing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anoints the broken branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rubs the balsam in the fractures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addresses then the birch-tree:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“With this balsam I anoint thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this salve thy wounds I cover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cover well thine injured places;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the birch-tree shall recover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow more beautiful than ever.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>True, the birch-tree soon recovered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew more beautiful than ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew more uniform its branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And its bole more strong and stately.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus it was he tried the balsam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the magic salve he tested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched with it the splintered sandstone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched the broken blocks of granite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched the fissures in the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the broken parts united,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the fragments grew together.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the young boy quick returning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the balsam he had finished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the gray-beard gave the ointment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the boy these measures uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Here I bring the balm of healing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wonderful the salve I bring thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will join the broken granite,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make the fragments grow together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heat the fissures in the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And restore the injured birch-tree.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With his tongue the old man tested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tested thus the magic balsam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the remedy effective,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the balm had magic virtues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then anointed he the minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched the wounds of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched them with his magic balsam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the balm of many virtues;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaking words of ancient wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words the gray-beard uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do not walk in thine own virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not work in thine own power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walk in strength of thy Creator;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not speak in thine own wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak with tongue of mighty Ukko.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my mouth, if there be sweetness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It has come from my Creator;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If my hands are filled with beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the beauty comes from Ukko.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the wounds had been anointed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the magic salve had touched them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffered fearful pain and anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sank upon the floor in torment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning one way, then another,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought for rest and found it nowhere,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till his pain the gray-beard banished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banished by the aid of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove away his killing torment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the court of all our trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the highest hill of torture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the distant rocks and ledges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the evil-bearing mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the realm of wicked Hisi.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he took some silken fabric,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick he tore the silk asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making equal strips for wrapping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tied the ends with silken ribbons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Making thus a healing bandage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he wrapped with skilful fingers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen’s knee and ankle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapped the wounds of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And this prayer the gray-beard uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ukko’s fabric is the bandage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko’s science is the surgeon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These have served the wounded hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapped the wounds of the magician.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look upon us, God of mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and guard us, kind Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And protect us from all evil!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guide our feet lest they may stumble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guard our lives from every danger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wicked wilds of Hisi.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt the mighty aid of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt the help of gracious Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway stronger grew in body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway were the wounds united,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the fearful pain departed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong and hardy grew the hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway walked in perfect freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned his knee in all directions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing neither pain nor trouble.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised his eyes to high Jumala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked with gratitude to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked on high, in joy and gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then addressed omniscient Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the prayer the minstrel uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O be praised, thou God of mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me praise thee, my Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou gavest me assistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And vouchsafed me thy protection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Healed my wounds and stilled mine anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banished all my pain and trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caused by Iron and by Hisi.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, ye people of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>People of this generation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the folk of future ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashion not in emulation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>River boat, nor ocean shallop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boasting of its fine appearance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God alone can work completion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to cause its perfect ending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never hand of man can find it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never can the hero give it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko is the only Master.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
