<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XLI: Wainamoinen’s Harp-Songs</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-41" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Wainamoinen’s Harp-Songs</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal wisdom-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laves his hands to snowy whiteness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits upon the rock of joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the stone of song be settles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the mount of silver clearness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the summit, golden colored;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes the harp by him created,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his hands the harp of fish-bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his knee the arch supporting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes the harp-strings in his fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words to those assembled:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hither come, ye Northland people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and listen to my playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the harp’s entrancing measures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my songs of joy and gladness.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the singer of Wainola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took the harp of his creation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick adjusting, sweetly tuning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deftly plied his skillful fingers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the strings that he had fashioned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now was gladness rolled on gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the harmony of pleasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echoed from the hills and mountains:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Added singing to his playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Out of joy did joy come welling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now resounded marvelous music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of Northland stopped and listened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every creature in the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the beasts that haunt the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On their nimble feet came bounding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to listen to his playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to hear his songs of joyance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaped the squirrels from the branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merrily from birch to aspen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climbed the ermines on the fences,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the plains the elk-deer bounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the lynxes purred with pleasure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wolves awoke in far-off swamp-lands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bounded o’er the marsh and heather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bear his den deserted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left his lair within the pine-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Settled by a fence to listen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaned against the listening gate-posts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the gate-posts yield beneath him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now he climbs the fir-tree branches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may enjoy and wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climbs and listens to the music</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Tapiola’s wisest senior,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Metsola’s most noble landlord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of Tapio, the people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young and aged, men and maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew like red-deer up the mountains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to listen to the playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the harp, of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tapiola’s wisest mistress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hostess of the glen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robed herself in blue and scarlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound her limbs with silken ribbons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat upon the woodland summit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the branches of a birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to listen to the playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the high-born hero’s harping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the songs of Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the birds that fly in mid-air</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell like snow-flakes from the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew to hear the minstrel’s playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eagles in their lofty eyrie</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the songs of the enchanter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift they left their unfledged young ones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew and perched around the minstrel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the heights the hawks descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the clouds down swooped the falcon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ducks arose from inland waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swans came gliding from the marshes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiny finches, green and golden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew in flocks that darkened sunlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came in myriads to listen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perched upon the head and shoulders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the charming Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweetly singing to the playing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the ancient bard and minstrel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the daughters of the welkin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature’s well-beloved daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listened all in rapt attention;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some were seated on the rainbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some upon the crimson cloudlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some upon the dome of heaven.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In their hands the Moon’s fair daughters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held their weaving-combs of silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their hands the Sun’s sweet maidens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasped the handles of their distaffs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaving with their golden shuttles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spinning from their silver spindles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the red rims of the cloudlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the bow of many colors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they hear the minstrel playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the harp of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick they drop their combs of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drop the spindles from their fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the golden threads are broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broken are the threads of silver.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the fish in Suomi-waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the songs of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came on flying fins to listen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came the trout with graceful motions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water-dogs with awkward movements,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the water-cliffs the salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sea-caves came the whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the deeper caves the bill-fish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came the pike from beds of sea-fern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little fish with eyes of scarlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaning on the reeds and rushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their heads above the surface;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to bear the harp of joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the songs of the enchanter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ahto, king of all the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient king with beard of sea-grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised his head above the billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a boat of water-lilies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glided to the coast in silence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listened to the wondrous singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words the sea-king uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Never have I heard such playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never heard such strains of music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never since the sea was fashioned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the songs of this enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sweet singer, Wainamoinen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Satko’s daughters from the blue-deep,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sisters of the wave-washed ledges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the colored strands were sitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoothing out their sea-green tresses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the combs of molten silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their silver-handled brushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brushes forged with golden bristles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they hear the magic playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the harp of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall their brushes on the billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall their combs with silver handles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bottom of the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unadorned their heads remaining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And uncombed their sea-green tresses.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Came the hostess of the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient hostess robed in flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rising from her deep sea-castle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swimming to the shore in wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listened to the minstrel’s playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the magic tones re-echoed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the singer’s song out-circled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sank the hostess into slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rocks of many colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her watery couch of joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep the sleep that settled o’er her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played one day and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played the third from morn till even.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There was neither man nor hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither ancient dame, nor maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in Metsola a daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom he did not touch to weeping;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept the young, and wept the aged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept the mothers, wept the daughters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept the warriors and heroes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the music of his playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the songs of the magician.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen’s tears came flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welling from the master’s eyelids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pearly tear-drops coursing downward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larger than the whortle-berries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finer than the pearls of ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoother than the eggs of moor-hens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brighter than the eyes of swallows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his eves the tear-drops started,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowed adown his furrowed visage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falling from his beard in streamlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trickled on his heaving bosom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Streaming o’er his golden girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coursing to his garment’s border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then beneath his shoes of ermine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowing on, and flowing ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part to earth for her possession,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Part to water for her portion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the tear-drops fall and mingle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Form they streamlets from the eyelids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the minstrel, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the blue-mere’s sandy margin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the deeps of crystal waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost among the reeds and rushes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake at last the ancient minstrel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is there one in all this concourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One in all this vast assembly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That can gather up my tear-drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the deep, pellucid waters?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus the younger heroes answered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered thus the bearded seniors:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There is none in all this concourse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None in all this vast assembly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That can gather up thy tear-drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the deep, pellucid waters.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again wise Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“He that gathers up my tear-drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the deeps of crystal waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall receive a beauteous plumage.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Came a raven, flying, croaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the minstrel thus addressed him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bring, O raven, bring my tear-drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the crystal lake’s abysses;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will give thee beauteous plumage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recompense for golden service.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the raven failed his master.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Came a duck upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hero thus addressed him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Bring O water-bird, my tear-drops;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often thou dost dive the deep-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink thy bill upon the bottom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the waters thou dost travel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dive again my tears to gather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will give thee beauteous plumage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Recompense for golden service.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the duck departed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither, thither, swam, and circled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dived beneath the foam and billow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered Wainamoinen’s tear-drops</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the blue-sea’s pebbly bottom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the deep, pellucid waters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought them to the great magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautifully formed and colored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glistening in the silver sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glimmering in the golden moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many-colored as the rainbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fitting ornaments for heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jewels for the maids of beauty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the origin of sea-pearls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blue-duck’s beauteous plumage.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
