<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune VI: Wainamoinen’s Hapless Journey</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-6" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Wainamoinen’s Hapless Journey</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now arranges for a journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the village of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the land of cruel winters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the land of little sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the land of worthy women;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes his light-foot, royal racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then adjusts the golden bridle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lays upon his back the saddle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver-buckled, copper-stirruped,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seats himself upon his courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And begins his journey northward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunges onward, onward, onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galloping along the highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his saddle, gaily fashioned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his dappled steed of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunging through Wainola’s meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the plains of Kalevala.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fast and far he galloped onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galloped far beyond Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bounded o’er the waste of waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he reached the blue-sea’s margin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wetting not the hoofs in running.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the evil Youkahainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nursed a grudge within his bosom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his heart the worm of envy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Envy of this Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this wonderful enchanter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He prepares a cruel cross-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made of steel and other metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paints the bow in many colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Molds the top-piece out or copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trims his bow with snowy silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold he uses too in trimming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he hunts for strongest sinews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds them in the stag of Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Interweaves the flax of Lempo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready is the cruel cross-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>String, and shaft, and ends are finished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful the bow and mighty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely cost it not a trifle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the back a painted courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On each end a colt of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the curve a maiden sleeping</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the notch a hare is bounding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wonderful the bow thus fashioned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cuts some arrows for his quiver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Covers them with finest feathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the oak the shafts be fashions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes the tips of keenest metal.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the rods and points are finished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he feathers well his arrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the plumage of the swallow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wing-quills of the sparrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardens well his feathered arrows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And imparts to each new virtues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steeps them in the blood of serpents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the virus of the adder.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ready now are all his arrows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready strung, his cruel cross-bow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting for wise Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youkahainen, Lapland’s minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waits a long time, is not weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hopes to spy the ancient singer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spies at day-dawn, spies at evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spies he ceaselessly at noontide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies in wait for the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waits, and watches, as in envy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits he at the open window,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands behind the hedge, and watches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the foot-path waits, and listens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spies along the balks of meadows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his back he hangs his quiver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his quiver, feathered arrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dipped in virus of the viper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his arm the mighty cross-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waits, and watches, and unwearied,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listens from the boat-house window,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingers at the end of Fog-point,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the river flowing seaward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the holy stream and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the sacred river’s fire-fall.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Finally the Lapland minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youkahainen of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the breaking of the day-dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the early hour of morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fixed his gaze upon the North-east,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned his eyes upon the sunrise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw a black cloud on the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Something blue upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And soliloquized as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Are those clouds on the horizon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or perchance the dawn of morning?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither clouds on the horizon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the dawning of the morning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The renowned and wise enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding on his way to Northland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his steed, the royal racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magic courser of Wainola.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quickly now young Youkahainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lapland’s vain and evil minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with envy, grasps his cross-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes his bow and arrows ready</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the death of Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick his aged mother asked him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to Youkahainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For whose slaughter is thy cross-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whose heart thy poisoned arrows?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youkahainen thus made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have made this mighty cross-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashioned bow and poisoned arrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the death of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to slay the friend of waters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must shoot the old magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal bard and hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the heart, and through the liver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the head, and through the shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this bow and feathered arrows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus destroy my rival minstrel.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the aged mother answered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus reproving, thus forbidding:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do not slay good Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient hero of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a noble tribe descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, my sister’s son, my nephew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou slayest Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient son of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then alas! all joy will vanish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perish all our wondrous singing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better on the earth the gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better here the magic music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than within the nether regions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the kingdom of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the realm of the departed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the land of the hereafter.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the youthful Youkahainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought awhile and well considered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere he made a final answer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>With one hand he raised the cross-bow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the other seemed to weaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he drew the cruel bow-string.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finally these words he uttered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As his bosom swelled with envy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let all joy forever vanish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let earth’s pleasures quickly perish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disappear earth’s sweetest music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happiness depart forever;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoot I will this rival minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little heeding what the end is.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quickly now he bends his fire-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his left knee rests the weapon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his right foot firmly planted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus he strings his bow of envy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes three arrows from his quiver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choosing well the best among them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carefully adjusts the bow-string,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sets with care the feathered arrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the flaxen string he lays it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds the cross-bow to his shoulder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aiming well along the margin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the heart of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting till he gallops nearer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the shadow of a thicket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words while he is waiting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be thou, flaxen string, elastic;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly fly, thou feathered ash-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly speed, thou deadly missile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick as light, thou poisoned arrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the heart of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If my hand too low should hold thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May the gods direct thee higher;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If too high mine eye should aim thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May the gods direct thee lower.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Steady now he pulls the trigger;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the lightning flies the arrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the head of Wainamoinen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the upper sky it darteth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the highest clouds it pierces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scatters all the flock of lamb-clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On its rapid journey skyward.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Not discouraged, quick selecting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick adjusting, Youkahainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly aiming shoots a second.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speeds the arrow swift as lightning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much too low he aimed the missile,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into earth the arrow plunges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierces to the lower regions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Splits in two the old Sand Mountain.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nothing daunted, Youkahainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick adjusting shoots a third one.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift as light it speeds its journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes the steed of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes the light-foot, ocean-swimmer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes him near his golden girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the shoulder of the racer.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon wise Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong fell upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunged beneath the rolling billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the saddle of the courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his dappled steed of magic.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then arose a mighty storm-wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roaring wildly on the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore away old Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far from land upon the billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the high and rolling billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the broad sea’s great expanses.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Boasted then young Youkahainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking Waino dead and buried,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the boastful words be uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nevermore, old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevermore in all thy life-time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the golden moonlight glistens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevermore wilt fix thy vision</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the meadows of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the plains of Kalevala;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full six years must swim the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tread the waves for seven summers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eight years ride the foamy billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the broad expanse of water;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six long autumns as a fir-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven winters as a pebble;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eight long summers as an aspen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the Lapland minstrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to his room delighting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When his mother thus addressed him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hast thou slain good Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain the son of Kalevala?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youkahainen thus made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have slain old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain the son of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he now may plow the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he now may sweep the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the billows rock and slumber.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the salt-sea plunged he headlong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the deep sank the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sidewise turned he to the sea-shore</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his back to rock forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the boundless sea to travel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to ride the rolling billows.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the mother:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe to earth for this thine action,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gone forever, joy and singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vanished is the wit of ages!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast slain good Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain the ancient wisdom-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain the pride of Suwantala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain the hero of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slain the joy of Kalevala.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
