<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XLVIII: Capture of the Fire-Fish</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-48" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVIII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Capture of the Fire-Fish</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal wisdom-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long reflected, well considered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to weave the net of flax-yarn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weave the fish-net of the fathers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the minstrel of Wainola:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who will plow the field and fallow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sow the flax, and spin the flax-threads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may prepare the fish-net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewith I may catch the Fire-pike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May secure the thing of evil?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Soon they found a fertile island,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the fallow soil befitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the border of the heather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And between two stately oak-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They prepared the soil for sowing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Searching everywhere for flax-seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found it in Tuoni’s kingdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the keeping of an insect.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then they found a pile of ashes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the fire had burned a vessel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the ashes sowed the seedlings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the Alue-lake and border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rich and loamy fallow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the seed took root and flourished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly grew to great proportions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a single night in summer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the flax was sowed at evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed within the earth by moonlight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick it grew, and quickly ripened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick Wainola’s heroes pulled it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick they broke it on the hackles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened with it to the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dipped it in the lake and washed it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly brought it home and dried it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly broke, and combed, and smoothed it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brushed it well at early morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid it into laps for spinning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the maidens twirl the spindles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spin the flaxen threads for weaving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a single night in summer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the sisters wind and reel it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make it ready for the needle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brothers weave it into fish-nets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fathers twist the cordage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the mothers knit the meshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapidly the mesh-stick circles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon the fish-net is completed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a single night in summer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the magic net is finished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And in length a hundred fathoms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rim three hundred fathoms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rounded stones are fastened to it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joined thereto are seven float-boards.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the young men take the fish-net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the old men cheer them onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wish them good-luck at their fishing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long they row and drag the flax-seine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here and there the net is lowered;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now they drag it lengthwise, sidewise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag it through the slimy reed-beds;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they do not catch the Fire-pike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only smelts, and luckless red-fish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little fish of little value.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us go ourselves a-fishing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us catch the fish of evil!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>To the fishing went the brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magic heroes of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pulled the fish-net through the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward an island in the deep-sea;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then they turn and drag the fish-net</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward a meadow jutting seaward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now they drag it toward Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw it lengthwise, sidewise, crosswise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catching fish of every species,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Salmon, trout, and pike, and whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not catch the evil Fire-fish.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the master, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made additions to its borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made it many fathoms wider,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a hundred fathoms longer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then these words the hero uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Famous blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us go again a-fishing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Row again the magic fish-net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag it well through all the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we may obtain the Fire-pike!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the Northland heroes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go a second time a-fishing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag their nets across the rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lakelets, seas, and bays, and inlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catching fish of many species,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the Fire-fish is not taken.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long reflecting, spake these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dear Wellamo, water-hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient mother with the reed-breast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, exchange thy water-raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Change thy coat of reeds and rushes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the garments I shall give thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light sea-foam, thine inner vesture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thine outer, moss and sea-grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashioned by the wind’s fair daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woven by the flood’s sweet maidens;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will give thee linen vestments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spun from flax of softest fiber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woven by the Moon’s white virgins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashioned by the Sun’s bright daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fitting raiment for Wellamo!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ahto, king of all the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruler of a thousand grottoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take a pole of seven fathoms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Search with this the deepest waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rummage well the lowest bottoms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stir up all the reeds and sea-weeds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither drive a school of gray-pike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive them to our magic fish-net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the haunts in pike abounding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the caverns, and the trout-holes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the whirlpools of the deep-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the bottomless abysses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the sunshine never enters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the moonlight never visits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sands are never troubled.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Rose a pigmy from the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the floods a little hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding on a rolling billow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pigmy spake these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dost thou wish a worthy helper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One to use the pole and frighten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pike and salmon to thy fish-nets?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and faithful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered thus the lake-born hero:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Yea, we need a worthy helper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One to hold the pole, and frighten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pike and salmon to our fish-nets.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the water-pigmy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut a linden from the border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall I scare with all my powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the forces of my being,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou needest shall I scare them?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the minstrel, Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If thou scarest as is needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt scare with all thy forces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the strength of thy dominions.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then began the pigmy-hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To affright the deep-sea-dwellers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove the fish in countless numbers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the net of the magicians.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew his net along the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew it with his ropes of flax-thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words of magic import:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come ye fish of Northland waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the regions of my fish-net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As my hundred meshes lower.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the net was drawn and fastened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many were the gray-pike taken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the master and magician.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, happy-hearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to a neighboring island,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a blue-point in the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near a red-bridge on the headland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Landed there his draught of fishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast the pike upon the sea-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Fire-pike was among them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast the others to the waters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“May I touch thee with my fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Using not my gloves of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Using not my blue-stone mittens?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the Sun-child hears and answers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I should like to carve the Fire-fish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I should like this pike to handle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I had the knife of good-luck.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick a knife falls from the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the clouds a magic fish-knife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver-edged and golden-headed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the girdle of the Sun-child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick he grasps the copper handle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the hero carves the Fire-pike,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds therein the tortured lake-trout;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carves the lake-trout thus discovered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds therein the fated whiting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carves the whiting, finds a blue-ball</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the third cave of his body.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, the blue-ball quick unwinding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds within a ball of scarlet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carefully removes the cover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds the ball of fire within it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds the flame from heaven fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the heights of the seventh heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through nine regions of the ether.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen long reflected</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to get the magic fire-ball</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Wainola’s fireless hearthstones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his cold and cheerless dwellings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick he snatched the fire of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fingers of the Sun-child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen’s beard it singes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns the brow of Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns the fingers of the blacksmith.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolling forth it hastens westward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens to the Alue shore-lines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns the juniper and alder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns the arid heath and meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rises to the lofty linden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns the firs upon the mountains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens onward, onward, onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns the islands of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns the Sawa fields and forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burns the dry lands of Karyala.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Straightway ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens through the fields and fenlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tracks the ranger to the glen-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds the Fire-child in an elm-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeping in a bed of fungus.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon wise Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wakes the child and speaks these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wicked fire that God created,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flame of Ukko from the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast gone in vain to sea-caves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the lakes without a reason;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better go thou to my village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hearthstones of my people;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide thyself within my chimneys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In mine ashes sleep and linger.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the daytime I will use thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To devour the blocks of birch-wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the evening I will hide thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the golden circle.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then he took the willing Panu,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took the willing fire of Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid it in a box of tinder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the punk-wood of a birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a vessel forged from copper;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried it with care and pleasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fog-point in the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the island forest covered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus returned the fire to Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the chambers of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hearths of Kalevala.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, famous blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to the deep-sea’s margin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat upon the rock of torture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeling pain the flame had given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laved his wounds with briny water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to still the Fire-child’s fury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to end his persecutions.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Long reflecting, Ilmarinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the flame of Ukko:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Evil Panu from the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wicked son of God from ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me what has made thee angry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made thee burn my weary members,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burn my beard, and face, and fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made me suffer death-land tortures?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again young Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“How can I wild Panu conquer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How shall I control his conduct,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make him end his evil doings?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, thou daughter from Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, white virgin of the hoar-frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come on shoes of ice from Lapland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Icicles upon thy garments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one hand a cup of white-frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the other hand an ice-spoon;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprinkle snow upon my members,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Fire-child has been resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the hoar-frost fall and settle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should this prayer be unavailing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, thou son of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, thou child of Frost from Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, thou Long-man from the ice-plains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the height of stately pine-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slender as the trunks of lindens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy hands the gloves of Hoar-frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cap of ice upon thy forehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy waist a white-frost girdle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring the ice-dust from Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the cold and sunless village.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rain is crystallized in Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ice in Pohya is abundant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lakes of ice and ice-bound rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frozen smooth, the sea of ether.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bounds the hare in frosted fur-robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climbs the bear in icy raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ambles o’er the snowy mountains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swans of frost descend the rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ducks of ice in countless numbers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swim upon thy freezing waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the cataract and whirlpool.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring me frost upon thy snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snow and ice in great abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the summit of the wild-top,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the borders of the mountains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thine ice, and snow, and hoar-frost</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cover well mine injured members</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where wild Panu has been resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the child of Fire has lingered.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should this call be ineffective,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko, God of love and mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First and last of the creators,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the east send forth a snow-cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the west despatch a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Join their edges well together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let there be no vacant places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let these clouds bring snow and hoar-frost,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay the healing balm of Ukko</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On my burning, tortured tissues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where wild Panu has been resting.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stills the pains by fire engendered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stills the agonies and tortures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought him by the child of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought him by the wicked Panu.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
