<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune I: Birth of Wainamoinen</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Birth of Wainamoinen</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>In primeval times, a maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauteous Daughter of the Ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passed for ages her existence</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the great expanse of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the prairies yet enfolded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearisome the maiden growing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Her existence sad and hopeless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus alone to live for ages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the infinite expanses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the air above the sea-foam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the far outstretching spaces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a solitude of ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She descended to the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waves her coach, and waves her pillow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the rising storm-wind</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying from the East in fierceness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whips the ocean into surges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes the stars with sprays of ocean</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the waves are white with fervor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To and fro they toss the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Storm-encircled, hapless maiden;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her sport the rolling billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her play the storm-wind forces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blue back of the waters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the white-wreathed waves of ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play the forces of the salt-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the lone and helpless maiden;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at last in full conception,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Union now of force and beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink the storm-winds into slumber;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overburdened now the maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot rise above the surface;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven hundred years she wandered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ages nine of man’s existence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam the ocean hither, thither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not rise above the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conscious only of her travail;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven hundred years she labored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere her first-born was delivered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus she swam as water-mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the east, and also southward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the west, and also northward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam the sea in all directions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frightened at the strife of storm-winds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam in travail, swam unceasing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere her first-born was delivered.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then began she gently weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these measures, heavy-hearted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe is me, in this my travail!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into what have I now fallen?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe is me, that I unhappy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left my home in subtle ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to dwell amid the sea-foam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be tossed by rolling billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be rocked by winds and waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the far outstretching waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the salt-sea’s vast expanses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing only pain and trouble!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better far for me, O Ukko!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were I maiden in the Ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than within these ocean-spaces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To become a water-mother!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All this life is cold and dreary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Painful here is every motion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I linger in the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As I wander through the ocean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko, thou O God, up yonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou the ruler of the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thou hither, thou art needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thou hither, I implore thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deliver me from trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deliver me in travail.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come I pray thee, hither hasten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten more that thou art needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste and help this helpless maiden!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When she ceased her supplications,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarce a moment onward passes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere a beauteous duck descending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens toward the water-mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes a-flying hither, thither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeks herself a place for nesting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies she eastward, flies she westward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Circles northward, circles southward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot find a grassy hillock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the smallest bit of verdure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot find a spot protected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot find a place befitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where to make her nest in safety.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying slowly, looking round her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She descries no place for resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking loud and long debating,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her words are such as follow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Build I in the winds my dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the floods my place of nesting?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely would the winds destroy it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far away the waves would wash it.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the daughter of the Ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the hapless water-mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised her shoulders out of water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised her knees above the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the duck might build her dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build her nesting-place in safety.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the duck in beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying slowly, looking round her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spies the shoulders of the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees the knees of Ether’s daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the hapless water-mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinks them to be grassy hillocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blue back of the ocean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence she flies and hovers slowly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightly on the knee she settles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds a nesting-place befitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where to lay her eggs in safety.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here she builds her humble dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lays her eggs within, at pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six, the golden eggs she lays there,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then a seventh, an egg of iron;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits upon her eggs to hatch them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly warms them on the knee-cap</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the hapless water-mother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hatches one day, then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then a third day sits and hatches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warmer grows the water round her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warmer is her bed in ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While her knee with fire is kindled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her shoulders too are burning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire in every vein is coursing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the maiden moves her shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shakes her members in succession,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shakes the nest from its foundation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the eggs fall into ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dash in pieces on the bottom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the deep and boundless waters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sand they do not perish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the pieces in the ocean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But transformed, in wondrous beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the fragments come together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forming pieces two in number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One the upper, one the lower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Equal to the one, the other.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From one half the egg, the lower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows the nether vault of Terra:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the upper half remaining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grows the upper vault of Heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the white part come the moonbeams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the yellow part the sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the motley part the starlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dark part grows the cloudage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the days speed onward swiftly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly do the years fly over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the shining of the new sun</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the lighting of the full moon.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Still the daughter of the Ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swims the sea as water-mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the floods outstretched before her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And behind her sky and ocean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finally about the ninth year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the summer of the tenth year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts her head above the surface,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts her forehead from the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And begins at last her workings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now commences her creations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the azure water-ridges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the mighty waste before her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where her hand she turned in water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There arose a fertile hillock;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheresoe’er her foot she rested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There she made a hole for fishes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where she dived beneath the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell the many deeps of ocean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where upon her side she turned her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the level banks have risen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where her head was pointed landward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There appeared wide bays and inlets;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When from shore she swam a distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And upon her back she rested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the rocks she made and fashioned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hidden reefs created,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the ships are wrecked so often,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where so many lives have perished.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus created were the islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocks were fastened in the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pillars of the sky were planted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fields and forests were created,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Checkered stones of many colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gleaming in the silver sunlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the rocks stood well established;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the singer, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not yet beheld the sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not seen the golden moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still remaining undelivered.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and trusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lingering within his dungeon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thirty summers altogether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of winters, also thirty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peaceful on the waste of waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the broad-sea’s yielding bosom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well reflected, long considered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How unborn to live and flourish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the spaces wrapped in darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In uncomfortable limits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where he had not seen the moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had not seen the silver sunshine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon these words he uttered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let himself be heard in this wise:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Take, O Moon, I pray thee, take me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take me, thou, O Sun above me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take me, thou, O Bear of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this dark and dreary prison,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these unbefitting portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this narrow place of resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this dark and gloomy dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence to wander from the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence to walk upon the islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dry land walk and wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an ancient hero wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walk in open air and breathe it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to see the moon at evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to see the silver sunlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to see the Bear in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the stars I may consider.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Since the Moon refused to free him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Sun would not deliver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the Great Bear give assistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>His existence growing weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his life but an annoyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bursts he then the outer portals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his dark and dismal fortress;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his strong, but unnamed finger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opens he the lock resisting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the toes upon his left foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the fingers of his right hand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creeps he through the yielding portals</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the threshold of his dwelling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his knees across the threshold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throws himself head foremost, forward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunges into deeps of ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunges hither, plunges thither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning with his hands the water;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swims he northward, swims he southward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swims he eastward, swims he westward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Studying his new surroundings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus our hero reached the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rested five years in the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six long years, and even seven years,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the autumn of the eighth year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When at last he leaves the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stops upon a promontory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a coast bereft of verdure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his knees he leaves the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the land he plants his right foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the solid ground his left foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly turns his hands about him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands erect to see the sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stands to see the golden moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may behold the Great Bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may the stars consider.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus our hero, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the wonderful enchanter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was delivered from his mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmatar, the Ether’s daughter.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
