<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XXIV: The Bride’s Farewell</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Bride’s Farewell</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Osmotar, the bride-instructor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives the wedding-guests this counsel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these measures to the bridegroom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ilmarinen, artist-brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Best of all my hero-brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my mother’s sons the dearest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gentlest, truest, bravest, grandest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen well to what I tell thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Maiden of the Rainbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of thy beauteous life-companion:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bridegroom, praise thy fate hereafter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praise forever thy good fortune;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou praisest, praise sincerely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good the maiden thou hast wedded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good the bride that Ukko gives thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Graciously has God bestowed her.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sound her praises to thy father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praise her virtues to thy mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy heart rejoice in secret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou hast the Bride of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely Maiden of the Rainbow!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Brilliant near thee stands the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy shoulder thy companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy under thy protection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful as golden moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful upon thy bosom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strong to do thy kindly bidding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labor with thee as thou wishest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rake the hay upon thy meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep thy home in full perfection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spin for thee the finest linen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weave for thee the richest fabrics,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make for thee the softest raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make thy weaver’s loom as merry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the cuckoo of the forest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make the shuttle glide in beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the ermine of the woodlands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make the spindle twirl as deftly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the squirrel spins the acorn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Village-maidens will not slumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thy young bride’s loom is humming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While she plies the graceful shuttle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bridegroom of the Bride of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noblest of the Northland heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge thyself a scythe for mowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Furnish it with oaken handle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carve it in thine ancient smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammer it upon thine anvil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have it ready for the summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the merry days of sunshine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thy bride then to the lowlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mow the grass upon thy meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rake the hay when it is ready,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make the reeds and grasses rustle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toss the fragrant heads of clover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make thy hay in Kalevala</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the silver sun is shining.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When the time has come for weaving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the loom attract the weaver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to her the spools and shuttles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the willing loom be worthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful the frame and settle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to her what may be needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the weaver’s song may echo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the lathe may swing and rattle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be heard within the village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the aged may remark it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the village-maidens question:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Who is she that now is weaving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What new power now plies the shuttle?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make this answer to the question:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘It is my beloved weaving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My young bride that plies the shuttle.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shall the weaver’s weft be loosened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall the young bride’s loom be tightened?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not let the weft be loosened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the weaver’s loom be tightened;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such the weaving of the daughters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Moon beyond the cloudlets;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such the spinning of the maidens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the Sun in high Jumala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the daughters of the Great Bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the daughters of the Evening.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bridegroom, thou beloved hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brave descendant of thy fathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou goest on a journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou drivest on the highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driving with the Rainbow-daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairest bride of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not lead her as a titmouse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a cuckoo of the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into unfrequented places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into copses of the borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into brier-fields and brambles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into unproductive marshes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let her wander not, nor stumble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On opposing rocks and rubbish.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in her father’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in her mother’s court-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has she fallen into ditches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stumbled hard against the fences,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Run through brier-fields, nor brambles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fallen over rocks, nor rubbish.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Magic bridegroom of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise descendant of the heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never let thy young wife suffer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never let her be neglected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never let her sit in darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never leave her unattended.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in her father’s mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the chambers of her mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has she sat alone in darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has she suffered for attention;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat she by the crystal window,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat and rocked, in peace and plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evenings for her father’s pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mornings for her mother’s sunshine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never mayest thou, O bridegroom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead the Maiden of the Rainbow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the mortar filled with sea-grass,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to grind the bark for cooking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to bake her bread from stubble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to knead her dough from tan-bark</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in her father’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in her mother’s mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was she taken to the mortar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to bake her bread from sea-grass.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shouldst lead the Bride of Beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the garner’s rich abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to draw the till of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grind the flour and knead for baking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to brew the beer for drinking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheaten flour for honey-biscuits.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hero-bridegroom of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never cause thy Bride of Beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To regret her day of marriage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never make her shed a tear-drop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never fill her cup with sorrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should there ever come an evening</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thy wife shall feel unhappy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put the harness on thy racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hitch the fleet-foot to the snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take her to her father’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the household of her mother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in thy hero-lifetime,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never while the moonbeams glimmer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give thy fair spouse evil treatment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never treat her as thy servant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not bar her from the cellar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not lock thy best provisions;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in her father’s mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never by her faithful mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was she treated as a hireling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Honored bridegroom of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Proud descendant of the fathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou treatest well thy young wife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthily wilt thou be treated;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou goest to her homestead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou visitest her father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt meet a cordial welcome.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Censure not the Bride of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never grieve thy Rainbow-maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never say in tones reproachful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She was born in lowly station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That her father was unworthy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honored are thy bride’s relations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From an old-time tribe, her kindred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When of corn they sowed a measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each one’s portion was a kernel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they sowed a cask of flax-seed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each received a thread of linen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never, never, magic husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Treat thy beauty-bride unkindly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach her not with lash of servants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike her not with thongs of leather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never has she wept in anguish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the birch-whip of her mother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand before her like a rampart,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be to her a strong protection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not let thy mother chide her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy father not upbraid her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never let thy guests offend her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should thy servants bring annoyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They may need the master’s censure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not harm the Bride of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never injure her thou lovest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three long years hast thou been wooing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping every month to win her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Counsel with the bride of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy young wife give instruction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kindly teach thy bride in secret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the long and dreary evenings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou sittest at the fireside;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach one year, in words of kindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach with eyes of love a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the third year teach with firmness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If she should not heed thy teaching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should not hear thy kindly counsel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After three long years of effort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut a reed upon the lowlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut a nettle from the border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teach thy wife with harder measures.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fourth year, if she heed not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threaten her with sterner treatment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the stalks of rougher edges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Use not yet the thongs of leather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not touch her with the birch-whip.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If she does not heed this warning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should she pay thee no attention,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut a rod upon the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a willow in the valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide it underneath thy mantle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the stranger may not see it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Show it to thy wife in secret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shame her thus to do her duty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike not yet, though disobeying.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should she disregard this warning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still refuse to heed thy wishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then instruct her with the willow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Use the birch-rod from the mountains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the closet of thy dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the attic of thy mansion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike, her not upon the common,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not conquer her in public,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the villagers should see thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the neighbors hear her weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the forests learn thy troubles.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch thy wife upon the shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let her stiffened back be softened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not touch her on the forehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor upon the ears, nor visage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If a ridge be on her forehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a blue mark on her eyelids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then her mother would perceive it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her father would take notice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the village-workmen see it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the village-women ask her</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Hast thou been in heat of battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou struggled in a conflict,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or perchance the wolves have torn thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the forest-bears embraced thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the black-wolf be thy husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bear be thy protector?’ ”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By the fireplace lay a gray-beard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hearthstone lay a beggar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the old man spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Never, never, hero-husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow thou thy young wife’s wishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow not her inclinations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As, alas! I did, regretful;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bought my bride the bread of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Veal, and beer, and best of butter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fish and fowl of all descriptions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beer I bought, home-brewed and sparkling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheat from all the distant nations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the dainties of the Northland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of this was unavailing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave my wife no satisfaction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often came she to my chamber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tore my sable locks in frenzy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a visage fierce and frightful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her eyeballs flashing anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scolding on and scolding ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever speaking words of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Using epithets the vilest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought me but a block for chopping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I sought for other measures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Used on her my last resources,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut a birch-whip in the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she spake in tones endearing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut a juniper or willow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she called me ‘hero-darling’;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When with lash my wife I threatened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung she on my neck with kisses.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus the bridegroom was instructed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the last advices given.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the Maiden of the Rainbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauteous bride of Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sighing heavily and moaning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell to weeping, heavy-hearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words from depths of sorrow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Near, indeed, the separation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near, alas! the time for parting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the time for my departure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O the anguish of the parting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O the pain of separation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these walls renowned and ancient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this village of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these scenes of peace and plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where my faithful mother taught me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where my father gave instruction</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To me in my happy childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my years were few and tender!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a child I did not fancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never thought of separation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the confines of this cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these dear old hills and mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, alas! I now must journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I now cannot escape it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Empty is the bowl of parting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the farewell-beer is taken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my husband’s sledge is waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the break-board looking southward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking from my father’s dwelling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“How shall I give compensation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How repay, on my departure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the kindness of my mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the counsel of my father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the friendship of my brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my sister’s warm affection?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gratitude to thee, dear father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my former-life and blessings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the comforts of thy table,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the pleasures of my childhood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gratitude to thee, dear mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy tender care and guidance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my birth and for my culture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nurtured by thy purest life-blood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gratitude to thee, dear brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gratitude to thee, sweet sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the servants of my childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my many friends and playmates!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Never, never, aged father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never, thou, beloved mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never, ye, my kindred spirits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never harbor care, nor sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never fall to bitter weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thy child has gone to others,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the distant home of strangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the meadows of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her father’s fields and firesides.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shines the Sun of the Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shines the golden Moon of Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glitter all the stars of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the firmament of ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full as bright on other homesteads;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not upon my father’s uplands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not upon my home in childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shines the Star of Joyance only.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now the time has come for parting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my father’s golden firesides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my brother’s welcome hearthstone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the chambers of my sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my mother’s happy dwelling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I leave the swamps and lowlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the grassy vales and mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the crystal lakes and rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the shores and sandy shallows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the white-capped surging billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the maidens swim and linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the mermaids sing and frolic;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the swamps to those that wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the corn-fields to the plowman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the forests to the weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the heather to the rover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the copses to the stranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the alleys to the beggar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the court-yards to the rambler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the portals to the servant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the matting to the sweeper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the highways to the roebuck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the woodland-glens to lynxes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the lowlands to the wild-geese,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the birch-tree to the cuckoo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I leave these friends of childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Journey southward with my husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the arms of Night and Winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the ice-grown seas of Northland.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should I once again, returning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pay a visit to my tribe-folk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother would not hear me calling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father would not see me weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling at my mother’s grave-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weeping o’er my buried father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On their graves the fragrant flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Junipers and mournful willows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Verdure from my mother’s tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the gray-beard of my father.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should I visit Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visit once again these borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one here would bid me welcome.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing in these hills would greet me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save perchance a few things only,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the fence a clump of osiers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a land-mark at the corner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which in early youth I planted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a child of little stature.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Mother’s kine perhaps will know me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which so often I have watered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which I oft have fed and tended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lowing now at my departure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the pasture cold and cheerless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure my mother’s kine will welcome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland’s daughter home returning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Father’s steeds may not forget me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steeds that I have often ridden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a maiden free and happy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neighing now for me departing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the pasture of my brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the stable of my father;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure my father’s steeds will know me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid Pohyola’s daughter welcome.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother’s faithful dogs may know me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I oft have fed and petted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dogs that I have taught to frolic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That now mourn for me departing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their kennels in the court-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their kennels cold and cheerless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sure my brother’s dogs will welcome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pohya’s daughter home returning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the people will not know me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I come these scenes to visit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the fords remain as ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though unchanged remain the rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though untouched the flaxen fish-nets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shores await my coming.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fare thou well, my dear old homestead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fare ye well, my native bowers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It would give me joy unceasing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could I linger here forever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now farewell, ye halls and portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leading to my father’s mansion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It would give me joy unceasing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could I linger here forever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fare ye well, familiar gardens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with trees and fragrant flowers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It would give me joy unceasing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could I linger here forever.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send to all my farewell greetings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fields, and groves, and berries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greet the meadows with their daisies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greet the borders with their fences,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greet the lakelets with their islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greet the streams with trout disporting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greet the hills with stately pine-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the valleys with their birches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fare ye well, ye streams and lakelets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fertile fields, and shores of ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All ye aspens on the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All ye lindens of the valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All ye beautiful stone-lindens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All ye shade-trees by the cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All ye junipers and willows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All ye shrubs with berries laden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waving grass and fields of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Arms of elms, and oaks, and alders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fare ye well, dear scenes of childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happiness of days departed!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ending thus, Pohyola’s daughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left her native fields and fallows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left the darksome Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her husband, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famous son of Kalevala.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But the youth remained for singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the chorus of the children:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hither came a bird of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flew in fleetness from the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to steal away our virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to win the Maid of Beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took away our fairest flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took our mermaid from the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Won her with his youth and beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his keys of ancient wisdom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who will lead us to the sea-beach,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who conduct us to the rivers?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the buckets will be idle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hooks will rest the fish-poles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now unswept will lie the matting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unswept the halls of birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Copper goblets be unburnished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dark the handles of the pitchers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fare thou well, dear Rainbow Maiden.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, happy bridegroom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened homeward with the daughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the beauty of the Northland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleetly flew the hero’s snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loudly creaked, and roared, and rattled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Down the banks of Northland waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the side of Honey-inlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the back of Sandy Mountain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stones went rolling from the highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the winds the sledge flew onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the yoke rang hoops of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud the spotted wood resounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loudly creaked the bands of willow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the birchen cross-bars trembled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the copper-bells rang music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the racing of the fleet-foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the courser’s gallop homeward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Journeyed one day, then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Journeyed still the third day onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In one hand the reins of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the other grasped the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One foot resting on the cross-bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the other in the fur-robes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merrily the steed flew homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly did the highways shorten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at last upon the third day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the sun was fast declining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There appeared the blacksmith’s furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nearer, Ilmarinen’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoke arising high in ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clouds of smoke to lofty heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the village of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the suitor’s forge and smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the chimneys of the hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the home of the successful.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
