<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLVI: Otso the Honey-Eater</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-46" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Otso the Honey-Eater</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Came the tidings to Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the village of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Wainola had recovered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her troubles and misfortunes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her sicknesses and sorrows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toothless dame of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Envy-laden, spake these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Know I other means of trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have many more resources;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will drive the bear before me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the heather and the mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive him from the fen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive great Otso from the glen-wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the cattle of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the flocks of Kalevala.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the Northland hostess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove the hungry bear of Pohya</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his cavern to the meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Wainola’s plains and pastures.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his brother spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge a spear from magic metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge a lancet triple-pointed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge the handle out of copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may destroy great Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slay the mighty bear of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he may not eat my horses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor destroy my herds of cattle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the flocks upon my pastures.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the skillful blacksmith</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forged a spear from magic metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forged a lancet triple-pointed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the longest, nor the shortest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forged the spear in wondrous beauty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one side a bear was sitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat a wolf upon the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blade an elk lay sleeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shaft a colt was running,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the hilt a roebuck bounding.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snows had fallen from the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made the flocks as white as ermine</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the hare, in days of winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the minstrel sang these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“My desire impels me onward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Metsola-dominions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the homes of forest-maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the courts of the white virgins;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will hasten to the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labor with the woodland-forces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ruler of the Tapio-forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make of me a conquering hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help me clear these boundless woodlands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O Mielikki, forest-hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tapio’s wife, thou fair Tellervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call thy dogs and well enchain them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set in readiness thy hunters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them wait within their kennels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Otso, thou O Forest-apple,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear of honey-paws and fur-robes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn that Wainamoinen follows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the singer comes to meet thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide thy claws within thy mittens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy teeth remain in darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they may not harm the minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be powerless in battle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mighty Otso, much beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey-eater of the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Settle on the rocks in slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the turf and in thy caverns;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the aspen wave above thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the merry birch-tree rustle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er thy head for thy protection.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest in peace, thou much-loved Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn about within thy thickets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the partridge at her brooding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the spring-time like the wild-goose.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard his dog bark in the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard his hunter’s call and echo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He addressed the words that follow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thought it was the cuckoo calling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought the pretty bird was singing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not the sacred cuckoo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the liquid notes of songsters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas my dog that called and murmured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Twas the echo of my hunter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the cavern-doors of Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the border of the woodlands.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and trusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finds the mighty bear in waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts in joy the golden covers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well inspects his shining fur-robes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts his honey-paws in wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then addresses his Creator:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be thou praised, O mighty Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thou givest me great Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Givest me the Forest-apple,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thanks be paid to thee unending.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bear he spake these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Otso, thou my well beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey-eater of the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let not anger swell thy bosom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have not the force to slay thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Willingly thy life thou givest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a sacrifice to Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast from the tree descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glided from the aspen branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slippery the trunks in autumn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fog-days, smooth the branches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden friend of fen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy fur-robes rich and beauteous,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride of woodlands, famous Light-foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thy cold and cheerless dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thy home within the alders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thy couch among the willows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten in thy purple stockings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten from thy walks restricted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come among the haunts of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Join thy friends in Kalevala.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shall never treat thee evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt dwell in peace and plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt feed on milk and honey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey is the food of strangers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste away from this thy covert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the couch of the unworthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a couch beneath the rafters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Wainola’s ancient dwellings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste thee onward o’er the snow-plain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a leaflet in the autumn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skip beneath these birchen branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a squirrel in the summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a cuckoo in the spring-time.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal wisdom-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the snow-fields hastened homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing o’er the hills and mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his guest, the ancient Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his friend, the famous Light-foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Honey-paw of Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far away was heard the singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the playing of the hunter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the songs of Wainamoinen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the people heard and wondered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Men and maidens, young and aged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their cabins spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hear the echoes from the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the bugle from the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the flute-notes of the songsters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the pipes of forest-maidens!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and trusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon appears within the court-yard.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rush the people from their cabins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the heroes ask these questions:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Has a mine of gold been opened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou found a vein of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Precious jewels in thy pathway?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does the forest yield her treasures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to thee the Honey-eater?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does the hostess of the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to thee the lynx and adder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou comest home rejoicing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing, singing, on thy snow-shoes?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave this answer to his people:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For his songs I caught the adder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught the serpent for his wisdom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore do I come rejoicing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing, playing, on my snow-shoes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the mountain lynx, nor serpent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes, however, to our dwellings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The Illustrious is coming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride and beauty of the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis the Master comes among us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Covered with his friendly fur-robe.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome, Otso, welcome, Light-foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome, Loved-one from the glenwood!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the mountain guest is welcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open wide the gates of entry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the bear is thought unworthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bar the doors against the stranger.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the tribe-folk:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We salute thee, mighty Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey-paw, we bid thee welcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome to our courts and cabins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome, Light-foot, to our tables</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decorated for thy coming!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We have wished for thee for ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting since the days of childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the notes of Tapio’s bugle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the singing of the wood-nymphs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the coming of dear Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the forest gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting for the year of plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Longing for it as for summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the shoe waits for the snow-fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the sledge for beaten highways,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the maiden for her suitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the wife her husband’s coming;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat at evening by the windows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the gates have, sat at morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat for ages at the portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the granaries in winter, Vanished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the snow-fields warmed and</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the sails unfurled in joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the earth grew green and blossomed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking all the while as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where is our beloved Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why delays our forest-treasure?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has he gone to distant Ehstland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the upper glens of Suomi?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whither shall I lead the stranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither take the golden Light-foot?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I lead him to the garner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the house of straw conduct him?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of his tribe-folk:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To the dining-hall lead Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greatest hero of the Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famous Light-foot, Forest-apple,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride and glory of the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no fear before these maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear not curly-headed virgins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clad in silver-tinselled raiment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maidens hasten to their chambers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When dear Otso joins their number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the hero comes among them.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the prayer of Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Grant, O Ukko, peace and plenty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath these painted rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this ornamented dweling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thanks be paid to gracious Ukko!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again the ancient minstrel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whither shall we lead dear Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Whither take the fur-clad stranger?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of his people:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hither let the fur-robed Light-foot</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be saluted on his coming;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the Honey-paw be welcomed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hearth-stone of the penthouse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcomed to the boiling caldrons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we may admire his fur-robe,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May behold his cloak with joyance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no care, thou much-loved Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let not anger swell thy bosom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thy coat we view with pleasure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We thy fur shall never injure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not make it into garments</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To protect unworthy people.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon wise Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pulled the sacred robe from Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread it in the open court-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut the members into fragments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid them in the heating caldrons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the copper-bottomed vessels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the fire the crane was hanging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the crane were hooks of copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hooks the broiling-vessels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with bear-steak for the feasting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seasoned with the salt of Dwina,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Saxon-land imported,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the distant Dwina-waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the salt-sea brought in shallops.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready is the feast of Otso;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fire are swung the kettles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the crane of polished iron;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the centers of the tables</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is the bear displayed in dishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden dishes, decorated;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the fir-tree and the linden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were the tables newly fashioned;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drinking cups were forged from copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knives of gold and spoons of silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled the vessels to their borders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the choicest bits of Light-foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fragments of the Forest-apple.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ancient one with bosom golden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Potent voice in Tapio’s councils</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Metsola’s most lovely hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hostess of the glen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hero-son of Tapiola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stalwart youth in cap of scarlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tapio’s most beauteous virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair Tellervo of the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Metsola with all her people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, and welcome, to the feasting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the marriage-feast of Otso!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All sufficient, the provisions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Food to eat and drink abundant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plenty for the hosts assembled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plenty more to give the village.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the question of the people:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tell us of the birth of Otso!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he born within a manger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he nurtured in the bath-room</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was his origin ignoble?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is Wainamoinen’s answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Otso was not born a beggar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not born among the rushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not cradled in a manger;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey-paw was born in ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the regions of the Moon-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shoulders of Otava,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the daughters of creation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Through the ether walked a maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the red rims of the cloudlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the border of the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her stockings purple-tinted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her golden-colored sandals.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her hand she held a wool-box,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a hair-box on her shoulder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Threw the wool upon the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hair upon the rivers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are rocked by winds and waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water-currents bear them onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear them to the sandy sea-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Land them near the Woods of honey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On an island forest-covered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fair Mielikki, woodland hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tapio’s most cunning daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took the fragments from the sea-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took the white wool from the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sewed the hair and wool together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid the bundle in her basket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Basket made from bark of birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bound with cords the magic bundle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the chains of gold she bound it</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the pine-tree’s topmost branches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There she rocked the thing of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocked to life the tender baby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the blossoms of the pine-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fir-top set with needles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the young bear well was nurtured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus was sacred Otso cradled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the honey-tree of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the middle of the forest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sacred Otso grew and flourished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly grew with graceful movements,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short of feet, with crooked ankles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide of mouth and broad of forehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Short his nose, his fur-robe velvet;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his claws were not well fashioned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither were his teeth implanted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair Mielikki, forest hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words in meditation:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Claws I should be pleased to give him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with teeth endow the wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would he not abuse the favor.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Swore the bear a promise sacred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his knees before Mielikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hostess of the glen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And before omniscient Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First and last of all creators,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he would not harm the worthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never do a deed of evil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then Mielikki, woodland hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisest maid of Tapiola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought for teeth and claws to give him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the stoutest mountain-ashes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the juniper and oak tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dry knots of the alder.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teeth and claws of these were worthless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would not render goodly service.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Grew a fir-tree on the mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew a stately pine in Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fir had silver branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing golden cones abundant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the sylvan maiden gathered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teeth and claws of these she fashioned</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the jaws and feet of Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set them for the best of uses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then she freed her new-made creature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the Light-foot walk and wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him lumber through the marshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him amble through the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll upon the plains and pastures;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taught him how to walk a hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to move with graceful motion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to live in ease and pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to rest in full contentment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the moors and in the marshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the borders of the woodlands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How unshod to walk in summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stockingless to run in autumn;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to rest and sleep in winter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the clumps of alder-bushes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the sheltering fir-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the pine’s protection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrapped securely in his fur-robes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the juniper and willow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the origin of Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey-eater of the Northlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the sacred booty cometh.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus again the people questioned:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why became the woods so gracious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why so generous and friendly?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why is Tapio so humored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That he gave his dearest treasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave to thee his Forest-apple,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey-eater of his kingdom?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was he startled with thine arrows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frightened with the spear and broadsword?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave this answer to the question:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Filled with kindness was the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glen and woodland full of greetings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tapio showing greatest favor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fair Mielikki, forest hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Metsola’s bewitching daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauteous woodland maid, Tellervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gladly led me on my journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoothed my pathway through the glen-wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Marked the trees upon the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pointing me to Otso’s caverns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Great Bear’s golden island.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When my journeyings had ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the bear had been discovered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had no need to launch my javelins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not need to aim the arrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Otso tumbled in his vaulting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost his balance in his cradle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fir-tree where he slumbered;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tore his breast upon the branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Freely gave his life to others.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mighty Otso, my beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou my golden friend and hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thy fur-cap from thy forehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay aside thy teeth forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide thy fingers in the darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Close thy mouth and still thine anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thy sacred skull is breaking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now I take the eyes of Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest he lose the sense of seeing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest their former powers shall weaken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I take not all his members,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not alone must these be taken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now I take the ears of Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest he lose the sense of hearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest their former powers shall weaken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I take not all his members,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not alone must these be taken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now I take the nose of Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest he lose the sense of smelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest its former powers shall weaken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I take not all his members,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not alone must this be taken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now I take the tongue of Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest he lose the sense of tasting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest its former powers shall weaken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I take not all his members,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not alone must this be taken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now I take the brain of Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest he lose the means of thinking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest his consciousness should fail him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest his former instincts weaken;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though I take not all his members,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not alone must this be taken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will reckon him a hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will count the teeth of Light-foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will loosen Otso’s fingers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their settings firmly fastened.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None he finds with strength sufficient</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To perform the task demanded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Counts the teeth of sacred Otso;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loosens all the claws of Light-foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his fingers strong as copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slips them from their firm foundations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaking to the bear these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Otso, thou my Honey-eater,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou my Fur-ball of the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward, onward, must thou journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy low and lonely dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the court-rooms of the village.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, my treasure, through the pathway</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the herds of swine and cattle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hill-tops forest covered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the high and rising mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the spruce-trees filled with needles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the branches of the pine-tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There remain, my Forest-apple,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linger there in lasting slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the silver bells are ringing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the pleasure of the shepherd.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus beginning, and thus ending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened from his emptied tables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the children thus addressed him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whither hast thou led thy booty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where hast left thy Forest-apple,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred Otso of the woodlands?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou left him on the iceberg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Buried him upon the snow-field?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou sunk him in the quicksand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid him low beneath the heather?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen spake in answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have not left him on the iceberg,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have not buried him in snow-fields;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the dogs would soon devour him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Birds of prey would feast upon him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have not hidden him in Swamp-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have not buried him in heather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the worms would live upon him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Insects feed upon his body.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither I have taken Otso,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the summit of the Gold-hill,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the copper-bearing mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid him in his silken cradle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the summit of a pine-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the winds and sacred branches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rock him to his lasting slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the pleasure of the hunter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the joy of man and hero.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the east his lips are pointing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While his eyes are northward looking;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But dear Otso looks not upward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the fierceness of the storm-winds</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would destroy his sense of vision.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched again his harp of joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang again his songs enchanting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the pleasure of the evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the joy of morn arising.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the singer of Wainola:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Light for me a torch of pine-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the darkness is appearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my playing may be joyous</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my wisdom-songs find welcome.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the ancient sage and singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise and worthy Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweetly sang and played, and chanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the long and dreary evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ending thus his incantation:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Grant, O Ukko, my Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the people of Wainola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May enjoy another banquet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the company of Light-foot;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant that we may long remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kalevala’s feast with Otso!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Grant, O Ukko, my Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the signs may guide our footsteps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the notches in the pine-tree</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May direct my faithful people</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bear-dens of the woodlands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That great Tapio’s sacred bugle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May resound through glen and forest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the wood-nymph’s call may echo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May be heard in field and hamlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the joy of all that listen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let great Tapio’s horn for ages</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ring throughout the fen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the hills and dales of Northland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the meadows and the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To awaken song and gladness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the forests of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the snowy plains of Suomi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the meads of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the coming generations.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
