<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XLIV: Birth of the Second Harp</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-44" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLIV</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Birth of the Second Harp</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long reflecting, sang these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“It is now the time befitting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To awaken joy and gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time for me to touch the harp-strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time to sing the songs primeval,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these spacious halls and mansions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these homes of Kalevala;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, alas! my harp lies hidden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sunk upon the deep-sea’s bottom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the salmon’s hiding-places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dwellings of the whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the people of Wellamo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Northland-pike assemble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevermore will I regain it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ahto never will return it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joy and music gone forever!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O thou blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge for me a rake of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thickly set the teeth of copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many fathoms long the handle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make a rake to search the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Search the broad-sea to the bottom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rake the weeds and reeds together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rake them to the curving sea-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may regain my treasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May regain my harp of fish-bone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the whiting’s place of resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the caverns of the salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the castles of Wellamo.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon young Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal metal-worker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forges well a rake of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Teeth in length a hundred fathoms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a thousand long the handle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thickly sets the teeth of copper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes the rake of magic metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travels but a little distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cylinders of oak-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the copper-banded rollers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where he finds two ships awaiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One was new, the other ancient.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and faithful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the new-made vessel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Go, thou boat of master-magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten to the willing waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speed away upon the blue-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And without the hand to move thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let my will impel thee seaward.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick the boat rolled to the billows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the cylinders of oak-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick descended to the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Willingly obeyed his master.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then began to rake the sea-beds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raked up all the water-flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bits of broken reeds and rushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deep-sea shells and colored pebbles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not find his harp of fish-bone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost forever to Wainola!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the ancient minstrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left the waters, homeward hastened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cap pulled down upon his forehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang this song with sorrow laden:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nevermore shall I awaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my harp-strings, joy and gladness!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevermore will Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charm the people of the Northland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the harp of his creation!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevermore my songs will echo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the hills of Kalevala!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the ancient singer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went lamenting through the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandered through the sighing pine-woods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the wailing of a birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard a juniper complaining;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawing nearer, waits and listens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the birch-tree he addresses:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore, brother, art thou weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merry birch enrobed in silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver-leaved and silver-tasselled?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou shedding tears of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou art not led to battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not enforced to war with wizards?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wisely does the birch make answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This the language of the many,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others speak as thou, unjustly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I only live in pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my silver leaves and tassels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only whisper my rejoicings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I have no cares, no sorrows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I have no hours unhappy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing neither pain nor trouble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am weeping for my smallness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am lamenting for my weakness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no sympathy, no pity,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand here motionless for ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stand alone in fen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these woodlands vast and joyless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others hope for coming summers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the beauties of the spring-time;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, alas! a helpless birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dread the changing of the seasons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must give my bark to others,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lose my leaves and silken tassels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often come the Suomi children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peel my bark and drink my life-blood:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wicked shepherds in the summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and steal my belt of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of my bark make berry-baskets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dishes make, and cups for drinking.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oftentimes the Northland maidens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut my tender limbs for birch-brooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bind my twigs and silver tassels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into brooms to sweep their cabins;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often have the Northland heroes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chopped me into chips for burning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times in the summer season,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the pleasant days of spring-time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foresters have ground their axes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On my silver trunk and branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robbed me of my life for ages;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This my spring-time joy and pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This my happiness in summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my winter days no better!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I think of former troubles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sorrow settles on my visage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And my face grows white with anguish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often do the winds of winter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hoar-frost bring me sadness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blast my tender leaves and tassels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear my foliage to others,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rob me of my silver raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave me naked on the mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lone, and helpless, and disheartened!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the good, old Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Weep no longer, sacred birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mourn no more, my friend and brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt have a better fortune;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will turn thy grief to joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make thee laugh and sing with gladness.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made a harp from sacred birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashioned in the days of summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful the harp of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the master’s hand created</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fog-point in the Big-Sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the island forest-covered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashioned from the birch the archings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the frame-work from the aspen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of the magician:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“All the archings are completed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the frame is fitly finished;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the hooks and pins for tuning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the harp may sing in concord?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Near the way-side grew an oak-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skyward grew with equal branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On each twig an acorn growing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden balls upon each acorn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On each ball a singing cuckoo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As each cuckoo’s call resounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Five the notes of song that issued</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the songster’s throat of joyance;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From each throat came liquid music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold and silver for the master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flowing to the hills and hillocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the silvery vales and mountains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence he took the merry harp-pins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the harp might play in concord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again wise Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I the pins have well completed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still the harp is yet unfinished;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I need five strings for playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where shall I procure the harp-strings?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the ancient bard and minstrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Journeyed through the fen and forest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a hillock sat a maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat a virgin of the valley;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the maiden was not weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joyful was the sylvan daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing with the woodland songsters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the eventide might hasten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hope that her beloved</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would the sooner sit beside her.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and trusted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened, tripping to the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked her for her golden ringlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of the magician:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Give me, maiden, of thy tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to me thy golden ringlets;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will weave them into harp-strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the joy of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the pleasure of his people.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the forest-maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave the singer of her tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave him of her golden ringlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of these he made the harp-strings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sources of eternal pleasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the people of Wainola.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus the sacred harp is finished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the minstrel, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sits upon the rock of joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes the harp within his fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns the arch up, looking skyward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his knee the arch supporting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sets the strings in tuneful order,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs his fingers o’er the harp-strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the notes of pleasure follow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal wisdom-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plays upon his harp of birch-wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far away is heard the music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wide the harp of joy re-echoes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mountains dance and valleys listen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flinty rocks are tom asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stones are hurled upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pebbles swim upon the Big-Sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pines and lindens laugh with pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alders skip about the heather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the aspen sways in concord.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the daughters of Wainola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway leave their shining needles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten forward like the current,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speed along like rapid rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they may enjoy and wonder.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laugh the younger men and maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy-hearted are the matrons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying swift to bear the playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To enjoy the common pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aged men and bearded seniors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gray-haired mothers with their daughters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stop in wonderment and listen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Creeps the babe in full enjoyment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he hears the magic singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of Northland stops in wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks in unison these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Never have we heard such playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never heard such strains of music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never since the earth was fashioned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the songs of this magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This sweet singer, Wainamoinen!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Far and wide the sweet tones echo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ring throughout the seven hamlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the seven islands echo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every creature of the Northland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens forth to look and listen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen to the songs of gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the beasts that haunt the woodlands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall upon their knees and wonder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the playing of the minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At his miracles of concord.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the songsters of the forests</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perch upon the trembling branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing to the wondrous playing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the dwellers of the waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave their beds, and caves, and grottoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swim against the shore and listen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the playing of the minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the little things in nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise from earth, and fall from ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and listen to the music,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the notes of the enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the songs of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Plays the singer of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plays in miracles of sweetness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plays one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plays the third from morn till even;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plays within the halls and cabins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dwellings of his people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the floors and ceilings echo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till resound the roofs of pine-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the windows speak and tremble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the portals echo joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hearth-stones sing in pleasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he journeys through the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he wanders through the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pine and sorb-tree bid him welcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Birch and willow bend obeisance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beech and aspen bow submission;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the linden waves her branches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the measure of his playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the notes of the magician.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the minstrel plays and wanders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings upon the mead and heather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glen and hill his songs re-echo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ferns and flowers laugh in pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the shrubs attune their voices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the music of the harp-strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the songs of Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
