<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XL: Birth of the Harp</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-40" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XL</span>
				</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Birth of the Harp</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward steered his goodly vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the isle of Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the borders of the village;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steered his war-ship through the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang it o’er the ocean-billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joyful steered it to Pohyola.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the banks were maidens standing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the daughters spake these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“List the music on the waters!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What this wonderful rejoicing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What this singing on the billows?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far more beautiful this singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This rejoicing on the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than our ears have heard in Northland.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steered his wonder-vessel onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steered one day along the sea-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steered the next through shallow waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steered the third day through the rivers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the reckless Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly some words remembered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He had heard along the fire-stream</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the cataract and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these words the hero uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cease, O cataract, thy roaring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cease, O waterfall, thy foaming!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maidens of the foam and current,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting on the rocks in water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the stone-blocks in the river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take the foam and white-capped billows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In your arms and still their anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That our ships may pass in safety!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aged dame beneath the eddy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou that livest in the sea-foam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swimming, rise above the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lift thy head above the whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather well the foam and billows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine arms and still their fury,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That our ship may pass in safety!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye, O rocks beneath the current,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the angry waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lower well your heads of danger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink below our magic vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That our ship may pass in safety!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should this prayer prove inefficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kimmo, hero son of Kammo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bore an outlet with thine auger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut a channel for this vessel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the rocks beneath the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That our ship may pass in safety!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should all this prove unavailing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hostess of the running water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Change to moss these rocky ledges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Change this vessel to an air-bag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That between these rocks and billows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It may float, and pass in safety!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Virgin of the sacred whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou whose home is in the river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spin from flax of strongest fiber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spin a thread of crimson color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw it gently through the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the thread our ship may follow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our vessel pass in safety!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goddess of the helm, thou daughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the ocean-winds and sea-foam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thy helm endowed with mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guide our vessel through these dangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten through these floods enchanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passing by the house of envy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the gates of the enchanters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That our ship may pass in safety!</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should this prayer prove inefficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko, Ruler of creation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guide our vessel with thy fire-sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guide it with thy blade of lightning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dangers of these rapids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the cataract and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That our ship may pass in safety!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon old Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steered his boat through winds and waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the rocky chinks and channels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the surges wildly tossing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the vessel passed in safety</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dangers of the current,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the sacred stream and whirlpool.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As it gains the open waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gains at length the broad-lake’s bosom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suddenly its motion ceases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On some object firmly anchored.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon young Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the aid of Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunges in the lake the rudder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struggles with the aid of magic;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he cannot move the vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot free it from its moorings.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addresses his companion:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou hero, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stoop and look beneath this war-ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See on what this boat is anchored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See on what our craft is hanging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this broad expanse of water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the broad-lake’s deepest soundings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If upon some rock or tree-snag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or upon some other hindrance.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon wild Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked beneath the magic vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peering through the crystal waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake and these the words he uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Does not rest upon a sand-bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor upon a rock, nor tree-snag,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But upon the back and shoulders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the mighty pike of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fin-bones of the monster.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and trusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Many things we find in water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocks, and trees, and fish, and sea-duck;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Are we on the pike’s broad shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fin-bones of the monster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pierce the waters with thy broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut the monster into pieces.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon wild Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reckless wizard, filled with courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pulls his broadsword from his girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From its sheath, the bone-divider,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes with might of magic hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Headlong falls into the water;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts the wizard from the river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words to dripping Ahti:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Accidents will come to mortals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Accidents will come to heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the hundreds, by the thousands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even to the gods above us!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew his broadsword from his girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From its sheath his blade of honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tried to slay the pike of Northland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the weapon of his forging;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he broke his sword in pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not harm the water-monster.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and trusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addresses his companions:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Poor apologies for heroes!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When occasion calls for victors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When we need some great magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Need a hero filled with valor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the arm that comes is feeble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mind insane or witless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strength and reason gone to others!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Straightway ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Miracle of strength and wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws his fire-sword from his girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wields the mighty blade of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes the waters as the lightning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes the pike beneath the vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And impales the mighty monster;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raises him above the surface,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the air the pike he circles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cuts the monster into pieces;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the water falls the pike-tail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ship the head and body;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easily the ship moves onward.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and faithful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the shore directs his vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the strand the boat he anchors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks in every nook and corner</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the fragments of the monster;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathers well the parts together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words to those about him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let the oldest of the heroes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slice for me the pike of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slice the fish to fitting morsels.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Answered all the men and heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the maidens spake, assenting:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Worthier the catcher’s fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen’s hands are sacred!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the wise magician</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew a fish-knife from his girdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sliced the pike to fitting morsels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again to those about him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let the youngest of the maidens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cook for me the pike of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set for me a goodly dinner!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the maidens quick responded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the virgins vied in cooking;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither could outdo the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the pike was rendered toothsome.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feasted all the old magicians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feasted all the younger heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feasted all the men and maidens;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rocks were left the fish-bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only relics of their feasting.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked upon the pile of fragments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fish-bones looked and pondered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words in meditation:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wondrous things might be constructed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the relics of this monster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were they in the blacksmith’s furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hands of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hands of Ilmarinen.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the blacksmith of Wainola:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nothing fine can be constructed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the bones and teeth of fishes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the skillful forger-artist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the hands of the magician.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Something wondrous might be builded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these jaws, and teeth, and fish-bones;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might a magic harp be fashioned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could an artist be discovered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That could shape them to my wishes.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>But he found no fish-bone artist</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That could shape the harp of joyance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the relics of their feasting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the jaw-bones of the monster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the will of the magician.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon wise Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set himself at work designing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick became a fish-bone artist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made a harp of wondrous beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lasting joy and pride of Suomi.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the harp’s enchanting arches?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the jaw-bones of the monster.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the necessary harp-pins?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the pike-teeth firmly fastened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the sweetly singing harp-strings?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the tail of Lempo’s stallion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus was born the harp of magic</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the mighty pike of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the relics from the feasting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the heroes of Wainola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the young men came to view it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the aged with their children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mothers with their beauteous daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maidens with their golden tresses;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the people on the islands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to view the harp of joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride and beauty of the Northland.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the aged try the harp-strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave it to the young magicians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dames and to their daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the maidens, silver-tinselled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the singers of Wainola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the young men touched the harp-strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then arose the notes of discord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the aged played upon it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dissonance their only music.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the wizard, Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O ye witless, worthless children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O ye senseless, useless maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O ye wisdom-lacking heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot play this harp of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot touch the notes of concord!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to me this thing of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither bring the harp of fish-bones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me try my skillful fingers.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen touched the harp-strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carefully the strings adjusted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned the harp in all directions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fingered all the strings in sequence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Played the instrument of wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But it did not speak in concord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not sing the notes of joyance.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There is none among these maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None among these youthful heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>None among the old magicians</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That can play the harp of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touch the notes of joy and pleasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us take the harp to Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to find a skillful player</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That can touch the strings in concord.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then they sailed to Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Pohyola took the wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to find the harp a master.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the heroes of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the boys and all the maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient dames, and bearded minstrels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly touched the harp of beauty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took the harp-strings in her fingers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the youth of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Youth of every tribe and station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly touched the harp of fish-bone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not find the notes of joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dissonance their only pleasure;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shrieked the harp-strings like the whirlwinds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the tones wore harsh and frightful.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In a corner slept a blind man,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay a gray-beard on the oven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rousing from his couch of slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmured thus within his corner:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cease at once this wretched playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make an end of all this discord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It benumbs mine ears for hearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Racks my brain, despoils my senses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robs me of the sweets of sleeping.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the harp of Suomi’s people</span>
				<br/>
				<span>True delight cannot engender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot bring the notes of pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot sing to sleep the aged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast the thing upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink it in the deeps of ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take it back to Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the home of him that made it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hands of its creator.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the harp made answer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the blind man sang these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall not fall upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not sink within the ocean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will play for my creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing in melody and concord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fingers of my master.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Carefully the harp was carried</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the artist that had made it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hands of its creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the feet of Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
