<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXVIII: Ilmarinen’s Fruitless Wooing</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-38" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVIII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ilmarinen’s Fruitless Wooing</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal metal-artist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lays aside the golden image,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauteous maid of magic metals;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throws the harness on his courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Binds him to his sledge of birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seats himself upon the cross-bench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snaps the whip above the racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thinking once again to journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the mansions of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to woo a bride in honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Second daughter of the Northland.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On he journeyed, restless, northward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Journeyed one day, then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the third from morn till evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he reached a Northland-village</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the plains of Sariola.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing in the open court-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spied the hero, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the metal-worker:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tell me how my child is living,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the Bride of Beauty prospers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a daughter to thy mother.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Head bent down and brow dejected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the Northland hostess:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O, thou dame of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not ask me of thy daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since, alas I in Tuonela</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeps the Maiden of the Rainbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeps in death the Bride, of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the fragrant heather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the kingdom of Manala.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come I for a second daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the fairest of thy virgins.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauteous hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to me thy youngest maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my former wife’s compartments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the chambers of her sister.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Foolish was the Northland-hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she gave her fairest virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the bloom of youth and beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the blacksmith of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only to be led to Mana,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a lambkin to the slaughter!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall never give my daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not give my youngest maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bride of thine to be hereafter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Life-companion at thy fireside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooner would I give the fair one</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cataract and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the river of Manala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the waters of Tuoni!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew away his head, disdainful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook his sable locks in anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered to the inner court-room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the maiden sat in waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these measures to the daughter:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come with me, thou bright-eyed maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cottage where thy sister</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived and lingered in contentment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Baked for me the toothsome biscuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brewed for me the beer of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept my dwelling-place in order.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the floor a babe was lying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus he sang to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Uninvited, leave this mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go, thou stranger, from this dwelling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once before thou camest hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only bringing pain and trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filling all our hearts with sorrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairest daughter of my mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not give this suitor welcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look not on his eyes with pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor admire his form and features.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his mouth are only wolf-teeth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cunning fox-claws in his mittens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his shoes art only bear-claws,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his belt a hungry dagger;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weapons these of blood and murder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only worn by the unworthy.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the daughter spake as follows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Follow thee this maid will never,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never heed unworthy suitors;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast slain the Bride of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once the Maiden of the Rainbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst also slay her sister.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I deserve a better suitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wish a truer, nobler husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wish to ride in richer sledges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have a better home-protection;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will I sweep the cottage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the coal-place of a blacksmith.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the hero, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal metal-artist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned his head away, disdainful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook his sable locks in anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly seized the trembling maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held her in his grasp of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened from the court of Louhi</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his sledge upon the highway.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his sleigh he seats the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snugly wraps her in his far-robes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snaps his whip above the racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gallops on the high-road homeward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With one hand the reins be tightens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the other holds the maiden.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks the virgin-daughter, weeping:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We have reached the lowland-berries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here the herbs of water-borders;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave me here to sink and perish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a child of cold misfortune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wicked Ilmarinen, listen!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou dost not quickly free me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will break thy sledge to pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throw thy fur-robes to the north-winds.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen makes this answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When the blacksmith builds his snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the parts are hooped with iron;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore will the beauteous maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never beat my sledge to fragments.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the silver-tinselled daughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept and wailed in bitter accents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrung her hands in desperation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If thou dost not quickly free me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall change to ocean-salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be a whiting of the waters.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou wilt never thus escape me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a pike I’ll fleetly follow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the maiden of Pohyola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept and wailed in bitter accents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrung her hands in desperation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again to Ilmarinen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If thou dost not quickly free me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall hasten to the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the rocks become an ermine!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou wilt never thus escape me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a serpent I will follow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the beauty of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wailed and wept in bitter accents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wrung her hands in desperation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake once more to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Surely, if thou dost not free me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a lark I’ll fly the ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide myself within the storm-clouds.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Neither wilt thou thus escape me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As an eagle I will follow.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>They had gone but little distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the courser shied and halted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frighted at some passing object;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the maiden looked in wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the snow beheld some foot-prints,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who has run across our highway?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Tis the timid hare”, he answered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the stolen maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sobbed, and moaned, in deeps of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy-hearted, spake these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe is me, ill-fated virgin!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happier far my life hereafter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the hare I could but follow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his burrow in the woodlands!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crook-leg’s fur to me is finer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the robes of Ilmarinen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tossed his head in full resentment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galloped on the highway homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travelled but a little distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When again his courser halted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frighted at some passing stranger.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the maiden looked and wondered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the snow beheld some foot-prints,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these measures to the blacksmith:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who has crossed our snowy pathway?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Tis a fox”, replied the minstrel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the beauteous virgin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moaned again in depths of anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang these accents, heavy-hearted:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe is me, ill-fated maiden!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happier far my life hereafter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the cunning fox to wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than with this ill-mannered suitor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reynard’s fur to me is finer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the robes of Ilmarinen.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the metal-worker</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shut his lips in sore displeasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened on the highway homeward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travelled but a little distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When again his courser halted.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick the maiden looked in wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the snow beheld some foot-prints,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to the magician:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who again has crossed our pathway?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“ ’Tis the wolf”, said Ilmarinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the fated daughter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell again to bitter weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And intoned these words of sorrow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe is me, a hapless maiden!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happier far my life hereafter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brighter far would be my future,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If these tracks I could but follow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the wolf the hair is finer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the furs of Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faithless suitor of the Northland.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the minstrel of Wainola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closed his lips again in anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook his sable locks, resentful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snapped the whip above the racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the steed flew onward swiftly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the way to Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the village of the blacksmith.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sad and weary from his journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen, home-returning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell upon his couch in slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the maiden laughed derision.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>In the morning, slowly waking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Head confused, and locks dishevelled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the wizard, words as follow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall I set myself to singing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magic songs and incantations?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I now enchant this maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a black-wolf on the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a salmon of the ocean?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not send her to the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the forest would be frighted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not send her to the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the fish would flee in terror;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This my sword shall drink her life-blood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>End her reign of scorn and hatred.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick the sword feels his intention,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick divines his evil purpose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Was not born to drink the life-blood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a maiden pure and lovely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a fair but helpless virgin.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the magic minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with rage, began his singing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang the very rocks asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the distant hills re-echoed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang the maiden to a sea-gull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Croaking from the ocean-ledges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling from the ocean-islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Screeching on the sandy sea-coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flying to the winds opposing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When his conjuring had ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen joined his snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whipped his steed upon a gallop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to his ancient smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his home in Kalevala.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes to meet him on the highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words to the magician:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ilmarinen, worthy brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore comest heavy-hearted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dismal Sariola?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does Pohyola live and prosper?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the minstrel, Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why should not Pohyola prosper?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the Sampo grinds unceasing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noisy rocks the lid in colors;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grinds one day the flour for eating,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grinds the second flour for selling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grinds the third day flour for keeping;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus it is Pohyola prospers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the Sampo is in Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is plowing, there is sowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is growth of every virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is welfare never-ending.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ilmarinen, artist-brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where then is the Northland-daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far renowned and beauteous maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For whose hand thou hast been absent?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have changed the hateful virgin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a sea-gull on the ocean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now she calls above the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Screeches from the ocean-islands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rocks she calls and murmurs</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly calling for a suitor.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
