<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV: Kullervo’s Evil Deeds</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Kullervo’s Evil Deeds</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Kullerwoinen, youthful wizard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his blue and scarlet stockings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Henceforth lingered with his parents;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he could not change his nature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not gain a higher wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not win a better judgment;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a child he was ill-nurtured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Early rocked in stupid cradles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a nurse of many follies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a minister of evil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his work went Kullerwoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strove to make his labors worthy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First, Kullervo went a-fishing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set his fishing-nets in ocean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his hands upon the row-locks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kullerwoinen spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall I pull with all my forces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pull with strength of youthful heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with weakness of the aged?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the stern arose a gray-beard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he answered thus Kullervo:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pull with all thy youthful vigor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou row with magic power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou couldst not destroy this vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couldst not row this boat to fragments.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rowed with all his youthful vigor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the mighty force of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rowed the bindings from the vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ribs of juniper he shattered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rowed the aspen-oars to pieces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the aged sire, Kalervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the work of Kullerwoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He addressed his son as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dost not understand the rowing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast burst the bands asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bands of juniper and willow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rowed my aspen-boat to pieces;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fish-nets drive the salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, perchance, will suit thee better.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the son, Kullervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to his work as bidden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove the salmon to the fish-nets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake in innocence as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Shall I with my youthful vigor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scare the salmon to the fish-nets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or with little magic vigor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I drive them to their capture?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the master of the fish-nets:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That would be but work of women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou use but little power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the frighting of the salmon!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kullerwoinen does as bidden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scares the salmon with the forces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his mighty arms and shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the strength of youth and magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stirs the water thick with black-earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beats the scare-net into pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into pulp he beats the salmon.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the aged sire, Kalervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw the work of Kullerwoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his son these words he uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dost not understand this labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this work thou art not suited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst not scare the perch and salmon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fish-nets of thy father;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast ruined all my fish-nets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torn my scare-net into tatters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beaten into pulp the whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Torn my net-props into fragments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beaten into bits my wedges.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the fishing to another;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See if thou canst pay the tribute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pay my yearly contribution;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See if thou canst better travel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the way show better judgment!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the son, Kullervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hapless youth in purple vestments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his magic shoes of deer-skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his locks of golden color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sallied forth to pay the taxes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pay the tribute for his people.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the youth had paid the tribute,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paid the yearly contribution,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He returned to join the snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took his place upon the cross-bench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snapped his whip above the courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And began his journey homeward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rattled on along the highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Measured as he galloped onward</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen’s hills and valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his fields in cultivation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came a golden maid to meet him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her snow-shoes came a virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the hills of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er his cultivated lowlands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the wizard-son, Kullervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Checked the motion of his racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the charming maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come, sweet maiden, to my snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my fur-robes rest and linger!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she ran, the maiden answered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let the Death-maid sit beside thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rest and linger in thy fur-robes!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snapped his whip above the courser;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleet as wind he gallops homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dashes down along the highway;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the roar of falling waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gallops onward, onward, onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the broad-back of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the icy plains of Lapland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes a winsome maid to meet him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden-haired, and wearing snow-shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the far outstretching ice-plains;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the wizard checks his racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charmingly accosts the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chanting carefully these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come, thou beauty, to my snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither come, and rest, and linger!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tauntingly the maiden answered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Take Tuoni to thy snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy side let Manalainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sit with thee, and rest, and linger!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the wizard, Kullerwoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck his fiery, prancing racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the birch-whip of his father.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the lightning flew the fleet-foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galloped on the highway homeward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the hills the snow-sledge bounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the coming mountains trembled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kullerwoinen, wild magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Measures, on his journey homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland’s far-extending borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the fertile plains of Pohya.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes a beauteous maid to meet him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a tin-pin on her bosom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the heather of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the Pohya-hills and moorlands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the wizard son, Kullervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Holds the bridle of his courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charmingly intones these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come, fair maiden, to my snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these fur-robes rest, and linger;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat with me the golden apples,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat the hazel-nut in joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink with me the beer delicious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat the dainties that I give thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the tin-pin on her bosom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have scorn to give thy snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scorn for thee, thou wicked wizard;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold is it beneath thy fur-robes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy sledge is chill and cheerless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the youth, Kullervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wicked wizard of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew the maiden to his snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew her to a seat beside him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly in his furs enwrapped her;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the tin-adorned made answer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the accents of the maiden:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Loose me from thy magic power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me leave at once thy presence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest I speak in wicked accents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest I say the prayer of evil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free me now as I command thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or I’ll tear thy sledge to pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throw these fur-robes to the north-winds.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway wicked Kullerwoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil wizard and magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opens all his treasure-boxes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shows the maiden gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shows her silken wraps of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silken hose with golden borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden belts with silver buckles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Jewelry that dims the vision,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blunts the conscience of the virgin.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver leads one to destruction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold entices from uprightness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kullerwoinen, wicked wizard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flatters lovingly the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One hand on the reins of leather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One upon the maiden’s shoulder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus they journey through the evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pass the night in merry-making.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the day-star led the morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the second day was dawning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the maid addressed Kullervo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Questioned thus the wicked wizard:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Of what tribe art thou descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of what race thy hero-father?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell thy lineage and kindred.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, Kullervo’s truthful answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Am not from a mighty nation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the greatest, nor the smallest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But my lineage is worthy:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am Kalervo’s son of folly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am a child of contradictions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hapless son of cold misfortune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me of thy race of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell thine origin and kindred.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the maiden:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Came not from a race primeval,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the largest, nor the smallest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But my lineage is worthy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am Kalervo’s wretched daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am his long-lost child of error,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am a maid of contradictions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hapless daughter of misfortune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When a child I lived in plenty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dwellings of my mother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the woods I went for berries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went for raspberries to uplands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered strawberries on mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered one day then a second;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But, alas! upon the third day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not find the pathway homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forestward the highways led me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the footpaths, to the woodlands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long I sat in bitter weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept one day and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept the third from morn till even.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then I climbed a lofty mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There I called in wailing accents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the woodlands gave this answer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the distant hills re-echoed:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Call no longer, foolish virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy calls and tears are useless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is none to give thee answer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far away, thy home and people.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“On the third and on the fourth days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fifth, and sixth, and seventh,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Constantly I sought to perish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But in vain were all my efforts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not die upon the mountains.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If this wretched maid had perished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the summer of the third year,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had fed earth’s vegetation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had blossomed as a flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knowing neither pain nor sorrow.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarcely had the maiden spoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she bounded from the snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rushed upon the rolling river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cataract’s commotion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fiery stream and whirlpool.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Kullervo’s lovely sister</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to her own destruction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her death by fire and water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found her peace in Tuonela,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sacred stream of Mana.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the wicked Kullerwoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell to weeping, sorely troubled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wailed, and wept, and heavy-hearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words in bitter sorrow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have slain my virgin-sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shamed the daughter of my mother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe to thee, my ancient father!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe to thee, my gray-haired mother!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore was I born and nurtured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why this hapless child’s existence?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better fate to Kullerwoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had he never seen the daylight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or, if born, had never thriven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these mournful days of evil!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Death has failed to do his duty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sickness sinned in passing by me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should have slain me in the cradle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the seventh day had ended!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon he slips the collar</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his prancing royal racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounts the silver-headed fleet-foot,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gallops like the lightning homeward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gallops only for a moment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he halts his foaming courser</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the cabin of his father.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the court-yard stood the mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the wicked son addressed her:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Faithful mother, fond and tender,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst thou slain me when an infant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoked my life out in the chamber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a winding-sheet hadst thrown me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cataract and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fire hadst set my cradle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After seven nights had ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy would have been thy service.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had the village-maidens asked thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Where is now the little cradle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore is the bath-room empty?’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This had been a worthy answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘I have burned the wizard’s cradle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast the infant to the fire-dogs;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the bath-room corn is sprouting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the barley malt is brewing.’ ”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the aged mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asks her wizard-son these questions:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What has happened to my hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What new fate has overcome thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comest thou as from Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the castles of Manala?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This, Kullervo’s frank confession:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Infamous the tale I bring thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My confession is dishonor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the way I met a maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Met thy long-lost, wayward daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not recognize my sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fatal was the sin committed!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the taxes had been settled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the tribute had been gathered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came a matchless maid to meet me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whom I witless led to sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This my mother’s long-lost daughter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she saw in me her brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick she bounded from the snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to the roaring waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cataract’s commotion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fiery stream and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to her full destruction.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now, alas! must I determine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now must find a spot befitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thy sinful son may perish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me, all-forgiving mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where to end my life of trouble;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me stop the black-wolf’s howling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me satisfy the hunger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the vicious bear of Northland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the shark or hungry sea-dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be my dwelling-place hereafter!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the mother:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do not go to stop the howling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the hungry wolf of Northland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not haste to still the black-bear</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Growling in his forest-cavern;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let not shark, nor vicious sea-dog</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be thy dwelling-place hereafter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spacious are the rooms of Suomi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Limitless the Sawa-borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Large enough to hide transgression,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man’s misdeeds to hide for ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his sins and evil actions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six long years man’s sins lie hidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the border-land of Kalma,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even nine for magic heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the years bring consolation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they quiet all his mourning.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kullerwoinen, wicked wizard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answers thus his grieving mother:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I can never hide from sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot flee from my misconduct;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the jaws of death I hasten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the open courts of Kalma,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hunting-grounds of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the battle-fields of heroes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Untamoinen still is living,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unmolested roams the wicked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unavenged my father’s grievance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unavenged my mother’s tortures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unavenged the wrongs I suffer!”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
