<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXVII: The Unwelcome Guest</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-27" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Unwelcome Guest</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>I have brought young Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the Islander and hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Also known as Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the jaws of death and ruin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the darkling deeps of Kalma,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the homesteads of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dismal courts of Louhi;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now must I relate his doings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must relate to all my bearers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the merry Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wandered through Pohyola’s chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the halls of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the hero went unbidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the feasting and carousal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uninvited to the banquet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen full of courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of life, and strength, and magic.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stepped across the ancient threshold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the centre of the court-room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the floors of linwood trembled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walls and ceilings creaked and murmured.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the reckless Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words that Ahti uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be ye greeted on my coming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye that greet, be likewise greeted!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen, all ye hosts of Pohya;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is there food about this homestead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barley for my hungry courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beer to give a thirsty stranger?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat the host of Sariola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the east end of the table,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave this answer to the questions:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Surely is there in this homestead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy steed an open stable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will this host refuse thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou act a part becoming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy, coming to these portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting near the birchen rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the spaces by the kettles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the triple hooks of iron.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the reckless Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook his sable locks and answered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lempo may perchance come hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him fill this lowly station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let him stand between the kettles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with soot he may be blackened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never has my ancient father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never has the dear old hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood upon a spot unworthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the portals near the rafters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his steed the best of stables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Food and shelter gladly furnished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a room for his attendants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Corners furnished for his mittens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hooks provided for his snow-shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halls in waiting for his helmet.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore then should I not find here</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What my father found before me?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the centre walked the hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked around the dining table,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat upon a bench and waited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a bench of polished fir-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the kettle creaked beneath him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“As a guest am I unwelcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the waiters bring no viands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring no dishes to the stranger?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilpotar, the Northland hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then addressed the words that follow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lemminkainen, thou art evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art here, but not invited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast not the look of kindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt give me throbbing temples,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art bringing pain and sorrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All our beer is in the barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the malt is in the kernel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All our grain is still ungarnered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our dinner has been eaten;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yesterday thou shouldst have been here,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come again some future season.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whereupon wild Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pulled his mouth awry in anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook his coal-black locks and answered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“All the tables here are empty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the feasting-time is over;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the beer has left the goblets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Empty too are all the pitchers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Empty are the larger vessels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toothless dame of dismal Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Badly managed is thy wedding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy feast is ill-conducted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the dogs hast thou invited;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast baked the honey-biscuit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheaten loaves of greatest virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brewed thy beer from hops and barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent abroad thine invitations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six the hamlets thou hast honored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine the villages invited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thy merry wedding-callers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast asked the poor and lowly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked the hosts of common people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked the blind, and deaf, and crippled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked a multitude of beggars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toilers by the day, and hirelings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked the men of evil habits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked the maids with braided tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I alone was not invited.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How could such a slight be given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I sent thee kegs of barley?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others sent thee grain in cupfuls,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought it sparingly in dippers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I sent thee fullest measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent the half of all my garners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the richest of my harvest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the grain that I had gathered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even now young Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though a guest of name and station</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has no beer, no food, no welcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Naught for him art thou preparing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing cooking in thy kettles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing brewing in thy cellars</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the hero of the Islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the closing of his journey.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilpotar, the ancient hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave this order to her servants:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come, my pretty maiden-waiter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Servant-girl to me belonging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay some salmon to the broiling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring some beer to give the stranger!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Small of stature was the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Washer of the banquet-platters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rinser of the dinner-ladles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Polisher of spoons of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And she laid some food in kettles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only bones and beads of whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turnip-stalks and withered cabbage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crusts of bread and bits of biscuit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then she brought some beer in pitchers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought of common drink the vilest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the stranger, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Might have drink, and meat in welcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to still his thirst and hunger.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the maiden spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou art sure a mighty hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here to drink the beer of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here to empty all our vessels!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the minstrel, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Closely handled all the pitchers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking to the very bottoms;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There beheld he writhing serpents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the centre adders swimming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the borders worms and lizards.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the hero, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with anger, spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Get ye hence, ye things of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Get ye hence to Tuonela,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the bearer of these pitchers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the maid that brought ye hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the evening moon has risen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the day-star seeks the ocean!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O thou wretched beer of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast met with great dishonor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into disrepute hast fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I’ll drink thee, notwithstanding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the rubbish cast far from me.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the hero to his pockets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrust his first and unnamed finger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Searching in his pouch of leather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick withdraws a hook for fishing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drops it to the pitcher’s bottom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the worthless beer of barley;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his fish-book hang the serpents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catches many hissing adders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catches frogs in magic numbers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Catches blackened worms in thousands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casts them to the floor before him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly draws his heavy broad sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And decapitates the serpents.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now he drinks the beer remaining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the wizard speaks as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“As a guest am I unwelcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since no beer to me is given</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That is worthy of a hero;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither has a ram been butchered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor a fattened calf been slaughtered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy food for Lemminkainen.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the landlord of Pohyola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered thus the Island-minstrel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore hast thou journeyed hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who has asked thee for thy presence?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake in answer Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Happy is the guest invited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happier when not expected;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen, son of Pohylander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Host of Sariola, listen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me beer for ready payment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give me worthy drink for money!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the landlord of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In bad humor, full of anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjured in the earth a lakelet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the feet of Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the Island-hero:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Quench thy thirst from yonder lakelet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, the beer that thou deservest!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little heeding, Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this insolence made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am neither bear nor roebuck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That should drink this filthy water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drink the water of this lakelet.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ahti then began to conjure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjured he a bull before him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bull with horns of gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the bull drank from the lakelet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drank he from the pool in pleasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the landlord of Pohyola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There a savage wolf created,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set him on the floor before him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To destroy the bull of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, full of courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjured up a snow-white rabbit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set him on the floor before him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To attract the wolf’s attention.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the landlord of Pohyola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjured there a dog of Lempo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set him on the floor before him</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To destroy the magic rabbit.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, full of mischief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjured on the roof a squirrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That by jumping on the rafters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might catch the dog’s attention.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the master of the Northland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjured there a golden marten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And he drove the magic squirrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his seat upon the rafters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, full of mischief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made a fox of scarlet color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And it ate the golden marten.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the master of Pohyola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjured there a hen to flutter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the fox of scarlet color.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, full of mischief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon a hawk created,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with beak and crooked talons</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He might tear the hen to pieces.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the landlord of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words the tall man uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Never will this feast be bettered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the guests are less in number;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I must do my work as landlord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Get thee hence, thou evil stranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cease thy conjurings of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave this banquet of my people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste away, thou wicked wizard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thine Island-home and people!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thus no hero will be driven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a son of any courage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be frightened by thy presence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will be driven from thy banquet.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the landlord of Pohyola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatched his broadsword from the rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew it rashly from the scabbard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressing Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ahti, Islander of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou the handsome Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us measure then our broadswords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let our skill be fully tested;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely is my broadsword better</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the blade within thy scabbard.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the hero, Lemminkainen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“That my blade is good and trusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has been proved on heads of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has on many bones been tested;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be that as it may, my fellow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thine order is commanding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let our swords be fully tested,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us see whose blade is better.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long ago my hero-father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tested well this sword in battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never failing in a conflict.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should his son be found less worthy?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he grasped his mighty broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drew the fire-blade from the scabbard</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hanging from his belt of copper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Standing on their hilts their broadswords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carefully their blades were measured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the sword of Northland’s master</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Longer than the sword of Ahti</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the half-link of a finger.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the reckless Lemminkainen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Since thou hast the longer broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt make the first advances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am ready for thy weapon.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon Pohyola’s landlord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the wondrous strength of anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tried in vain to slay the hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike the crown of Lemminkainen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chipped the splinters from the rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut the ceiling into fragments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not touch the Island-hero.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon brave Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed Pohyola’s master:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have the rafters thee offended?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the crimes they have committed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou hewest them in pieces?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen now, thou host of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reckless landlord of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little room there is for swordsmen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these chambers filled with women;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>We shall stain these painted rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stain with blood these floors and ceilings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us go without the mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the field is room for combat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the plain is space sufficient;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blood looks fairer in the court-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better in the open spaces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let it dye the snow-fields scarlet.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the yard the heroes hasten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There they find a monstrous ox-skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread it on the field of battle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the ox-skin stand the swordsmen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Listen well, thou host of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thy broadsword is the longer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though thy blade is full of horror,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt have the first advantage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Use with skill thy boasted broadsword</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the final bout is given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere thy head be chopped in pieces;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike with skill, or thou wilt perish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike, and do thy best for Northland.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon Pohyola’s landlord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raised on high his blade of battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck a heavy blow in anger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Struck a second, then a third time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But he could not touch his rival,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could Dot draw a single blood-drop</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the veins of Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Skillful Islander and hero.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the handsome Kaukomieli:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let me try my skill at fencing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me swing my father’s broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let my honored blade be tested!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the landlord of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does not heed the words of Ahti,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes in fury, strikes unceasing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever aiming, ever missing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the skillful Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swings his mighty blade of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire disports along his weapon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashes from his sword of honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glistens from the hero’s broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balls of fire disporting, dancing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blade of mighty Ahti,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Overflow upon the shoulders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the landlord of Pohyola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the hero, Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou son of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See! indeed thy neck is glowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the dawning of the morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the rising Sun in ocean!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly turned Pohyola’s landlord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thoughtless host of darksome Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To behold the fiery splendor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playing on his neck and shoulders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick as lightning, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his father’s blade of battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a single blow of broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With united skill and power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lopped the head of Pohya’s master;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one cleaves the stalks of turnips,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the ear falls from the corn-stalk,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As one strikes the fins from salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the head rolled from the shoulders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the landlord of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a ball it rolled and circled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the yard were pickets standing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hundreds were the sharpened pillars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a head on every picket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only one was left un-headed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the victor, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Took the head of Pohya’s landlord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spiked it on the empty picket.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the Islander, rejoicing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick returning to the chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crave this order to the hostess:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Evil maiden, bring me water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewithal to cleanse my fingers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the blood of Northland’s master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wicked host of Sariola.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilpotar, the Northland hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fired with anger, threatened vengeance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Conjured men with heavy broadswords,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heroes clad in copper-armor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hundred warriors with their javelins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a thousand bearing cross-bows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To destroy the Island-hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the death of Lemminkainen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kaukomieli soon discovered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the time had come for leaving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That his presence was unwelcome</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the feasting of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the banquet of her people.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
