<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII: Wainioinen’s Rescue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Wainioinen’s Rescue</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam through all the deep-sea waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floating like a branch of aspen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a withered twig of willow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam six days in summer weather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam six nights in golden moonlight;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still before him rose the billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And behind him sky and ocean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two days more he swam undaunted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two long nights be struggled onward.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the evening of the eighth day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen grew disheartened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Felt a very great discomfort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his feet had lost their toe-nails,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his fingers dead and dying.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad and weary, spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe is me, my old life fated!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe is me, misfortune’s offspring!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fool was I when fortune, favored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To forsake my home and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For a maiden fair and lovely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here beneath the starry heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this cruel waste of waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Days and nights to swim and wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here to struggle with the storm-winds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To be tossed by heaving billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this broad sea’s great expanses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this ocean vast and boundless.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cold my life and sad and dreary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Painful too for me to linger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evermore within these waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to struggle for existence!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot know how I can prosper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to find me food and shelter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these cold and lifeless waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these days of dire misfortune.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build I in the winds my dwelling?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will find no sure foundation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build my home upon the billows?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely would the waves destroy it.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes a bird from far Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the occident, an eagle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is not classed among the largest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor belongs he to the smallest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One wing touches on the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the other sweeps the heavens;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the waves he wings his body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strikes his beak upon the sea-cliffs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies about, then safely perches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks before him, looks behind him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There beholds brave Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blue-back of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the eagle thus accosts him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore art thou, ancient hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swimming in the deep-sea billows?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the water-minstrel answered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I am ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friend and fellow of the waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, the famous wisdom-singer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went to woo a Northland maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maiden from the dismal Darkland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly galloped on my journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Riding on the plain of ocean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I arrived one morning early,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the breaking of the day-dawn.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the bay of Luotola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near Youkola’s foaming river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the evil Youkahainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slew my steed with bow and arrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tried to slay me with his weapons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the waters fell I headlong,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plunged beneath the salt-sea’s surface,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the saddle of the courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my dappled steed of magic.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Then arose a mighty storm-wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the East and West a whirlwind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Washed me seaward on the surges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seaward, seaward, further, further,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where for many days I wandered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam and rocked upon the billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where as many nights I struggled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dashing waves and sea-foam,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the angry winds and waters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe is me, my life hard-fated!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot solve this heavy problem,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to live nor how to perish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this cruel salt-sea water.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build I in the winds my dwelling?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will find no sure foundation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build my home upon the waters?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely will the waves destroy it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must I swim the sea forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must I live, or must I perish?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What will happen if I perish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If I sink below the billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perish here from cold and hunger?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the bird of Ether answered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be not in the least disheartened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Place thyself between my shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On my back be firmly seated,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will lift thee from the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear thee with my pinions upward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear thee wheresoe’er thou willest.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well do I the day remember</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thou didst the eagle service,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou didst the birds a favor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou didst leave the birch-tree standing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When were cleared the Osmo-forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the lands of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a home for weary song-birds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a resting-place for eagles.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then arises Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts his head above the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boldly rises from the sea-waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts his body from the billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seats himself upon the eagle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the eagle’s feathered shoulders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick aloft the huge bird bears him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bears the ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bears him on the path of zephyrs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floating on the vernal breezes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the distant shore of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dismal Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the eagle leaves his burden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flies away to join his fellows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, lone and weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway fell to bitter weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept and moaned in heavy accents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the border of the blue-sea.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a cheerless promontory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a hundred wounds tormented,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made by cruel winds and waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his hair and beard dishevelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the surging of the billows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three long days he wept disheartened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept as many nights in anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not know what way to journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could not find a woodland foot-print,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That would point him to the highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his home in Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his much-loved home and kindred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland’s young and slender maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With complexion fair and lovely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Sun had laid a wager,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the Sun and Moon a wager,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Which should rise before the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the morning of the morrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the maiden rose in beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long before the Sun had risen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long before the Moon bad wakened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their beds beneath the ocean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the cock had crowed the day-break,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the Sun had broken slumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She had sheared six gentle lambkins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered from them six white fleeces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence to make the rolls for spinning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence to form the threads for weaving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hence to make the softest raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the morning dawn had broken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the sleeping Sun had risen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When this task the maid had ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then she scrubbed the birchen tables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweeps the ground-floor of the stable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a broom of leaves and branches</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the birches of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scrapes the sweepings well together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a shovel made of copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carries them beyond the stable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the doorway to the meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the meadow’s distant border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the surges of the great-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listens there and looks about her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears a wailing from the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears a weeping from the sea-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears a hero-voice lamenting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon she hastens homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens to her mother’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words the maiden utters:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have heard a wail from ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard a weeping from the sea-coast,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shore some one lamenting.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient, toothless dame of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens from her door and court-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the meadow to the sea-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listens well for sounds of weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the wail of one in sorrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears the voice of one in trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears a hero-cry of anguish.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the ancient Louhi answers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This is not the wail of children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are not the tears of women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this way weep bearded heroes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the hero-cry of anguish.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick she pushed her boat to water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the floods her goodly vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway rows with lightning swiftness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the weeping Wainamoinen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives the hero consolation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comfort gives she to the minstrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wailing in a grove of willows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his piteous condition,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the alder-trees and aspens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the border of the salt-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visage trembling, locks dishevelled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ears, and eyes, and lips of sadness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addresses Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tell me what has been thy folly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou art in this condition.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old and truthful Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts aloft his bead and answers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well I know that it is folly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That has brought me all this trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought me to this land of strangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these regions unbefitting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy was I with my kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my distant home and country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There my name was named in honor.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus replied to Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I would gain the information,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should I be allowed to ask thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thou art of ancient heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who of all the host of heroes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is Wainamoinen’s answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Formerly my name was mentioned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often was I heard and honored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a minstrel and magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the long and dreary winters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called the Singer of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the valleys of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the plains of Kalevala;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No one thought that such misfortune</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could befall wise Wainamoinen.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus replied in cheering accents</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rise, O hero, from discomfort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy bed among the willows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter now upon the new-way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come with me to yonder dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There relate thy strange adventures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell the tale of thy misfortunes.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now she takes the hapless hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts him from his bed of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her boat she safely seats him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And begins at once her rowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rows with steady hand and mighty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her home upon the sea-shore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dwellings of Pohyola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There she feeds the starving hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rests the ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives him warmth, and food, and shelter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the hero soon recovers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the hostess of Pohyola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Questioned thus the ancient singer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore didst thou, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friend and fellow of the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weep in sad and bitter accents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the border of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mid the aspens and the willows?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is Wainamoinen’s answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Had good reason for my weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cause enough for all my sorrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long indeed had I been swimming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had been buffeting the billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the far outstretching waters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the reason for my weeping;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have lived in toil and torture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I left my home and country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left my native land and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to this the land of strangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these unfamiliar portals.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy trees have thorns to wound me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy branches, spines to pierce me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even birches give me trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the alders bring discomfort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My companions, winds and waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only does the Sun seem friendly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this cold and cruel country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near these unfamiliar portals.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi thereupon made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Weep no longer, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grieve no more, thou friend of waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good for thee, that thou shouldst linger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At our friendly homes and firesides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt live with us and welcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt sit at all our tables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat the salmon from our platters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat the sweetest of our bacon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eat the whiting from our waters.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answers thus old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grateful for the invitation:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Never do I court strange tables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the food be rare and toothsome;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One’s own country is the dearest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One’s own table is the sweetest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One’s own home, the most attractive.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant, kind Ukko, God above me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou Creator, full of mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant that I again may visit</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My beloved home and country.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better dwell in one’s own country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to drink Its healthful waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the simple cups of birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than in foreign lands to wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to drink the rarest liquors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the golden bowls of strangers.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus replied to the magician:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What reward wilt thou award me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should I take thee where thou willest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy native land and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy much-loved home and fireside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the meadows of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the plains of Kalevala?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“What would be reward sufficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou take me to my people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my home and distant country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the borders of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to hear the cuckoo singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the sacred cuckoo calling?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I give thee golden treasures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill thy cups with finest silver?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is Louhi’s simple answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only true and wise magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will I ask for riches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never ask for gold nor silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold is for the children’s flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver for the stallion’s jewels.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst thou forge for me the Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammer me the lid in colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the tips of white-swan feathers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the milk of greatest virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a single grain of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the finest wool of lambkins?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will give thee too my daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will reward thee through the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thee to thy much-loved home-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the borders of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to hear the cuckoo singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the sacred cuckoo calling.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, much regretting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave this answer to her question:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cannot forge for thee the Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot make the lid in colors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take me to my distant country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will send thee Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will forge for thee the Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammer thee the lid in colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He may win thy lovely maiden;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy smith is Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this art is first and master;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He, the one that forged the heavens.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forged the air a hollow cover;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nowhere see we hammer-traces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nowhere find a single tongs-mark.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus replied the hostess, Louhi:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Him alone I’ll give my daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Promise him my child in marriage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who for me will forge the Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammer me the lid in colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the tips of white-swan feathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the milk of greatest virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a single grain of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the finest wool of lambkins.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the hostess Louhi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harnessed quick a dappled courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hitched him to her sledge of birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed within it Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Placed the hero on the cross-bench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made him ready for his journey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then addressed the ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words that Louhi uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do not raise thine eyes to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look not upward on thy journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While thy steed is fresh and frisky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the day-star lights thy pathway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the evening star has risen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thine eyes be lifted upward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the day-star lights thy pathway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dire misfortune will befall thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some sad fate will overtake thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleetly drove upon his journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merrily he hastened homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened homeward, happy-hearted</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the ever-darksome Northland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dismal Sariola.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
