<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLV: Birth of the Nine Diseases</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-45" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Birth of the Nine Diseases</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the word in Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the Dews with ears of envy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Wainola lives and prospers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That Osmoinen’s wealth increases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the ruins of the Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruins of the lid in colors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon her wrath she kindled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well considered, long reflected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How she might prepare destruction</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the people of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the tribes of Kalevala.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With this prayer she turns to Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus entreats the god of thunder:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ukko, thou who art in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help me slay Wainola’s people</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thine iron-hail of justice,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thine arrows tipped with lightning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or from sickness let them perish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them die the death deserving;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the men die in the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the women in the hurdles!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The blind daughter of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old and wicked witch, Lowyatar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worst of all the Death-land women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ugliest of Mana’s children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Source of all the host of evils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the ills and plagues of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Black in heart, and soul, and visage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil genius of Lappala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made her couch along the wayside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fields of sin and sorrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned her back upon the East-wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the source of stormy weather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the chilling winds of morning.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the winds arose at evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy-laden grew Lowyatar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the east-wind’s impregnation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sand-plains, vast and barren.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long she bore her weight of trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many morns she suffered anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till at last she leaves the desert,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes her couch within the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a rock upon the mountain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Labors long to leave her burden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the mountain-springs and fountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the crystal waters flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the sacred stream and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the cataract and fire-stream;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her burden does not lighten.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind Lowyatar, old and ugly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew not where to look for succor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to lose her weight of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where to lay her evil children.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the Highest from the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These, the words of mighty Ukko:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is a triangle in Swamp-field,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the border of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the never-pleasant Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dismal Sariola;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither go and lay thy burden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Pohyola leave thine offspring;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the Laplanders await thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will bid thy children welcome.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the blind Lowyatar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blackest daughter of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mana’s old and ugly maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened on her journey northward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the chambers of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ancient halls of Louhi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to lay her heavy burdens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to leave her evil offspring.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old and toothless witch of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes Lowyatar to her mansion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silently she leads the stranger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bath-rooms of her chamber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pours the foaming beer of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lubricates the bolts and hinges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That their movements may be secret,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these measures to Lowyatar:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Faithful daughter of Creation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou most beautiful of women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First and last of ancient mothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten on thy feet to ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ocean’s centre hasten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take the sea-foam from the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take the honey of the mermaids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And anoint thy sacred members,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy labors may be lightened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Should all this be unavailing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko, thou who art in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten hither, thou art needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thou to thy child in trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Help the helpless and afflicted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thy golden-colored sceptre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Charm away opposing forces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strike the pillars of the stronghold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open all resisting portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the great and small may wander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their ancient hiding-places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the courts and halls of freedom.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finally the blind Lowyatar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wicked witch of Tuonela,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was delivered of her burden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid her offspring in the cradle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the golden covers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus at last were born nine children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In an evening of the summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Lowyatar, blind and ancient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ugly daughter of Tuoni.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faithfully the virgin-mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guards her children in affection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As an artist loves and nurses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What his skillful hands have fashioned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Lowyatar named her offspring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Colic, Pleurisy, and Fever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ulcer, Plague, and dread Consumption,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gout, Sterility, and Cancer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the worst of these nine children</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blind Lowyatar quickly banished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove away as an enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To bewitch the lowland people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To engender strife and envy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banished all the other children</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fog-point in the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the island forest-covered;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banished all the fatal creatures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave these wicked sons of evil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the people of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the youth of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the Kalew-tribe’s destruction.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick Wainola’s maidens sicken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young and aged, men and heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the worst of all diseases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With diseases new and nameless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sick and dying is Wainola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise and wonderful enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens to his people’s rescue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens to a war with Mana,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a conflict with Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To destroy the evil children</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the evil maid, Lowyatar.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen heats the bath-rooms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heats the blocks of healing-sandstone</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the magic wood of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered by the sacred river;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water brings in covered buckets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the cataract and whirlpool;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brooms he brings enwrapped with ermine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well the bath the healer cleanses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Softens well the brooms of birch-wood;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then a honey-heat be wakens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fills the rooms with healing vapors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the virtue of the pebbles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glowing in the heat of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus he speaks in supplication:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Come, O Ukko, to my rescue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God of mercy, lend thy presence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give these vapor-baths new virtues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grant to them the powers of healing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And restore my dying people;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive away these fell diseases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banish them to the unworthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the holy sparks enkindle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep this heat in healing limits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it may not harm thy children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not injure the afflicted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I pour the sacred waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the heated blocks of sandstone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May the water turn to honey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laden with the balm of healing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the stream of magic virtues</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ceaseless flow to all my children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this bath enrolled in sea-moss,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the guiltless may not suffer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my tribe-folk may not perish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the Master gives permission,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Until Ukko sends his minions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sends diseases of his choosing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To destroy my trusting people.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wicked witch that sent these troubles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffer from a gnawing conscience,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suffer for her evil doings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should the Master of Wainola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lose his magic skill and weaken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should he prove of little service</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deliver from misfortune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To deliver from these evils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then may Ukko be our healer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be our strength and wise Physician.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Omnipresent God of mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou who livest in the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten hither, thou art needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten to thine ailing children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To observe their cruel tortures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To dispel these fell diseases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive destruction from our borders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring with thee thy mighty fire-sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring to me thy blade of lightning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may subdue these evils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That these monsters I may banish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send these pains, and ills, and tortures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the empire of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the kingdom of the east-winds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the islands of the wicked,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the caverns of the demons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the rocks within the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hidden beds of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the rocks may fall and sicken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the beds of iron perish.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocks and metals do not murmur</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the hands of the invader.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Torture-daughter of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting on the mount of anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the junction of three rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning rocks of pain and torture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turn away these fell diseases</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the virtues of the blue-stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead them to the water-channels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sink them in the deeps of ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the winds can never find them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the sunlight never enters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Should this prayer prove unavailing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O, Health-virgin, maid of beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and heal my dying people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still their agonies and anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give them consciousness and comfort,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give them healthful rest and slumber;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These diseases take and banish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take them in thy copper vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy eaves within the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the summit of the Pain-rock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurl them to thy boiling caldrons.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the mountain is a touch-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lucky-stone of ancient story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a hole bored through the centre,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through this pour these pains and tortures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wretched feelings, thoughts of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Human ailments, days unlucky,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tribulations, and misfortunes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they may not rise at evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not see the light of morning.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ending thus, old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal, wise enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rubbed his sufferers with balsams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rubbed the tissues, red and painful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the balm of healing flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balsams made of herbs enchanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sprinkled all with healing vapors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words in supplication.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ukko, thou who art in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God of justice, and of mercy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send us from the east a rain-cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send a dark cloud from the North-west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the north let fall a third one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send us mingled rain and honey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Balsam from the great Physician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To remove this plague of Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What I know of healing measures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only comes from my Creator;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lend me, therefore, of thy wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may relieve my people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save them from the fell destroyer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If my hands should fall in virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the hands of Ukko follow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God alone can save from trouble.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come to us with thine enchantment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speak the magic words of healing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That my people may not perish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to all alleviation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From their sicknesses and sorrows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the morning, in the evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let their wasting ailments vanish;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive the Death-child from Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevermore to visit Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in the course of ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never while the moonlight glimmers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the lakes of Kalevala.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal wisdom-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus expelled the nine diseases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil children or Lowyatar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Healed the tribes of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saved his people from destruction.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
