<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XLVII: Louhi Steals Sun, Moon, and Fire</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-47" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XLVII</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Louhi Steals Sun, Moon, and Fire</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Touched again his magic harp-strings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang in miracles of concord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled the north with joy and gladness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Melodies arose to heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Songs arose to Luna’s chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Echoed through the Sun’s bright windows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Moon has left her station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drops and settles in the birch-tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Sun comes from his castle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Settles in the fir-tree branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes to share the common pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes to listen to the singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the harp of Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland’s old and toothless wizard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes the Sun and Moon her captives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her arms she takes fair Luna</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From her cradle in the birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calls the Sun down from his station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fir-tree’s bending branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carries them to upper Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the darksome Sariola;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hides the Moon, no more to glimmer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a rock of many colors;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hides the Sun, to shine no longer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the iron-banded mountain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon these words she utters:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Moon of gold and Sun of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hide your faces in the caverns</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Pohyola’s dismal mountain;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shine no more to gladden Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I come to give ye freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drawn by coursers nine in number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sable coursers of one mother!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the golden Moon had vanished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the silver Sun had hidden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the iron-banded caverns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi stole the fire from Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the regions of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left the mansions cold and cheerless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cabins full of darkness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Night was king and reigned unbroken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkness ruled in Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darkness in the home of Ukko.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard to live without the moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harder still without the sunshine;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko’s life is dark and dismal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the Sun and Moon desert him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko, first of all creators,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived in wonder at the darkness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long reflected, well considered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why this miracle in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What this accident in nature</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Moon upon her journey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why the Sun no more is shining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why has disappeared the moonlight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then great Ukko walked the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the border of the cloudlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his purple-colored vestments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his silver-tinselled sandals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeking for the golden moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking for the silver sunshine.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lightning Ukko struck in darkness</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the edges of his fire-sword;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shot the flames in all directions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his blade of golden color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into heaven’s upper spaces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Ether’s starry pastures.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a little fire had kindled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko hid it in the cloud-space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a box of gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a case adorned with silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave it to the ether-maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called a virgin then to rock it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That it might become a new-moon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That a second sun might follow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the long-cloud rocked the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blue-edge of the ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocked the fire of the Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her copper-colored cradle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her ribbons silver-studded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lowly bend the bands of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud the golden cradle echoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the clouds of Northland thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Low descends the dome of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the rocking of the lightning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rocking of the fire of Ukko.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the flame was gently cradled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the virgin of the ether.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long the fair and faithful maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stroked the Fire-child with her fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tended it with care and pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till in an unguarded moment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It escaped the Ether-virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slipped the hands of her that nursed it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the heavens are burst asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the vault of Ukko opens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Downward drops the wayward Fire-child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Downward quick the red-ball rushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoots across the arch of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hisses through the startled cloudlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flashes through the troubled welkin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through nine starry vaults of ether.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake and these the words he uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Blacksmith brother, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us haste and look together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the kind of fire that falleth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the form of light that shineth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the upper vault of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the lower earth and ocean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has a second moon arisen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can it be a ball of sunlight?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon the heroes wandered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Onward journeyed and reflected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to gain the spot illumined,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to find the sacred Fire-child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came a river rushing by them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broad and stately as an ocean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There began to build a vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build a boat to cross the river.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the aid of Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the oak he cut the row-locks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the pine the oars be fashioned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the aspen shapes the rudder.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the vessel they had finished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick they rolled it to the current,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard they rowed and ever forward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Nawa-stream and waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the head of Nawa-river.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmatar, the ether-daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Foremost daughter of creation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came to meet them on their journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the coming strangers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who are ye of Northland heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rowing on the Nawa-waters?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen gave this answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I the ancient Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell us now thy name and station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither going, whence thou comest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thy tribe-folk live and linger?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the daughter of the Ether:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I the oldest of the women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am the first of Ether’s daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am the first of ancient mothers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven times have I been wedded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the heroes of creation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither do ye strangers journey?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered thus old Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fire has left Wainola’s hearth-stones,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light has disappeared from Northland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have been sitting long in darkness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold and darkness our companions;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now we journey to discover</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the fire that fell from heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Falling from the cloud’s red lining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the deeps of earth and ocean.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmatar returned this answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hard the flame is to discover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard indeed to find the Fire-child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has committed many mischiefs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing good has he accomplished;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the fire-ball fell from ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the red rims of the cloudlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the plains of the Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the ever-moving heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the purple ether-spaces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the blackened flues of Turi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Palwoinen’s rooms uncovered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the fire had reached the chambers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of Palwoinen, son of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He began his wicked workings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He engaged in lawless actions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raged against the blushing maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fired the youth to evil conduct,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singed the beards of men and heroes.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Where the mother nursed her baby,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cold and cheerless cradle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thither flew the wicked Fire-child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to perpetrate some mischief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cradle burned the infant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the infant burned the mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the babe might visit Mana,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the kingdom of Tuoni;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Said the child was born for dying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only destined for destruction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the tortures of the Fire-child.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greater knowledge had the mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not journey to Manala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knew the word to check the red-flame,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to banish the intruder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the eyelet of a needle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the death-hole of the hatchet.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Questioned Ilmatar as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whither did the Fire-child wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither did the red-flame hasten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the border-fields of Turi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the woods, or to the waters?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway Ilmatar thus answers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When the fire had fled from Turi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the castles of Palwoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the eyelet of the needle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the death-hole of the hatchet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>First it burned the fields, and forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burned the lowlands, and the heather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then it sought the mighty waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought the Alue-sea and river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the waters hissed and sputtered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their anger at the Fire-child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fiery red the boiling Alue!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Three times in the nights of summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nine times in the nights of autumn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boil the waters to the tree-tops,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll and tumble to the mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the red-ball’s force and fury;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurls the pike upon the pastures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the mountain-cliffs, the salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the ocean-dwellers wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long reflect and well consider</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to still the angry waters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept the salmon for his grotto,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mourned the whiting for his cavern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the lake-trout for his dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the crook-necked salmon darted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tried to catch the fire-intruder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the red-ball quick escaped him;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darted then the daring whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swallowed quick the wicked Fire-child,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swallowed quick the flame of evil.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quiet grow the Alue-waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slowly settle to their shore-lines,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To their long-accustomed places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the long and dismal evening.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Time had gone but little distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the whiting grow affrighted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear befel the fire-devourer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burning pain and writhing tortures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized the eater of the Fire-child;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam the fish in all directions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called, and moaned, and swam, and circled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam the third from morn till even;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam she to the whiting-island,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the caverns of the salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a hundred islands cluster;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the islands there assembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the fire-devourer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘There is none within these waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this narrow Alue-lakelet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will eat the fated Fire-fish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will swallow thee in trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine agonies and torture</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Fire-child thou hast eaten.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hearing this a trout forth darting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swallowed quick as light the whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly ate the fire-devourer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Time had gone but little distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the trout became affrighted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear befel the whiting-eater;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burning pain and writhing torment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized the eater of the Fire-fish.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam the trout in all directions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called, and moaned, and swam, and circled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swain the third from morn till even;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam she to the salmon-island,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam she to the whiting-grottoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a thousand islands cluster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the islands there assembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the tortured lake-trout:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘There is none within this river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these narrow Alue-waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will eat the wicked Fire-fish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will swallow thee in trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine agonies and tortures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Fire-fish thou hast eaten.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing this the gray-pike darted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swallowed quick as light the lake-trout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly ate the tortured Fire-fish.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Time had gone but little distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the gray-pike grew affrighted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fear befel the lake-trout-eater;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burning pain and writhing torment</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seized the reckless trout-devourer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam the pike in all directions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called, and moaned, and swam, and circled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swam the third from morn till even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cave of ocean-swallows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sand-hills of the sea-gull,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where a hundred islands cluster;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the islands there assembled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the fire-devourer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘There is none within this lakelet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these narrow Alue-waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will eat the fated Fire-fish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will swallow thee in trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine agonies and tortures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the Fire-fish thou hast eaten.’ ”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, wise and ancient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the aid of Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaves with skill a mighty fish-net</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the juniper and sea-grass;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dyes the net with alder-water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ties it well with thongs of willow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called the maidens to the fish-net,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sisters came as bidden.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the netting rowed they onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rowed they to the hundred islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the grottoes of the salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the caverns of the whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the reeds of sable color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the gray-pike rests and watches.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On they hasten to the fishing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag the net in all directions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag it lengthwise, sidewise, crosswise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And diagonally zigzag;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they did not catch the Fire-fish.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the brothers went a-fishing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dragged the net in all directions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Backwards, forwards, lengthwise, sidewise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the homes of ocean-dwellers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the grottoes of the salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dwellings of the whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the reed-beds of the lake-trout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the gray-pike lies in ambush;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the fated Fire-fish came not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came not from the lake’s abysses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came not from the Alue-waters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little fish could not be captured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the large nets of the masters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Murmured then the deep-sea-dwellers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the salmon to the lake-trout,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the lake-trout to the whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the whiting to the gray-pike:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Have the heroes of Wainola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Died, or have they all departed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these fertile shores and waters?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where then are the ancient weavers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weavers of the nets of flax-thread,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Those that frighten us with fish-poles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drag us from our homes unwilling?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hearing this wise Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered thus the deep-sea-dwellers:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Neither have Wainola’s heroes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Died, nor have they all departed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these fertile shores and waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Two are born where one has perished;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Longer poles and finer fish-nets</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have the sons of Kalevala!”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
