<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIV: Death of Lemminkainen</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Death of Lemminkainen</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Lemminkainen, much disheartened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeply thought and long considered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What to do, what course to follow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether best to leave the wild-moose</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fastnesses of Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And return to Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a third time hunt the ranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping thus to bring him captive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus return at last a victor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the forest home of Louhi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the joy of all her daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the wood-nymph’s happy fireside.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Taking courage Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words in supplication:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ukko, thou O God above me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou Creator of the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put my snow-shoes well in order,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And endow them both with swiftness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I rapidly may journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over marshes, over snow-fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over lowlands, over highlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the realms of wicked Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the distant plains of Lapland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the paths of Lempo’s wild-moose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the forest hills of Juutas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the snow-fields shall I journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the heroes to the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the way to Tapiola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Tapio’s wild dwellings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Greeting bring I to the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greeting to the vales and uplands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greet ye, heights with forests covered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greet ye, ever-verdant fir-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greet ye, groves of whitened aspen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greetings bring to those that greet you,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fields, and streams, and woods of Lapland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring me favor, mountain-woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lapland-deserts, show me kindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mighty Tapio, be gracious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me wander through thy forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me glide along thy rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let this hunter search thy snow-fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the wild-moose herds in numbers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the bounding reindeer lingers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O Nyrikki, mountain hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Tapio of forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hero with the scarlet head-gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Notches make along the pathway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Landmarks upward to the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That this hunter may not wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not fall, and falling perish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the snow-fields of thy kingdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunting for the moose of Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dowry for the pride of Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Mistress of the woods, Mielikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forest-mother, formed in beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy gold flow out abundant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy silver onward wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the hero that is seeking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the wild-moose of thy kingdom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring me here thy keys of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the golden girdle round thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open Tapio’s rich chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And unlock the forest fortress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I here await the booty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I hunt the moose of Lempo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Should this service be too menial</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give the order to thy servants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send at once thy servant-maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And command it to thy people.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt never seem a hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou hast not in thy service,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maidens ready by the hundreds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thousands that await thy bidding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who thy herds may watch and nurture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tend the game of thy dominions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Tall and slender forest-virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tapio’s beloved daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blow thou now thy honey flute-notes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play upon thy forest-whistle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the hearing of thy mistress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy charming woodland-mistress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make her hear thy sweet-toned playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That she may arise from slumber.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should thy mistress not awaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the calling of thy flute-notes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play again, and play unceasing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make the golden tongue re-echo.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wild and daring Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steadfast prays upon his journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Calling on the gods for succor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens off through fields and moorlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passes on through cruel brush-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the colliery of Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the burning fields of Lempo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glided one day, then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glided all the next day onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till he came to Big-stone mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climbed upon its rocky summit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turned his glances to the north-west,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the Northland moors and marshes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There appeared the Tapio-mansion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the doors were golden-colored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shining in the gleam of sunlight</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the thickets on the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the distant fields of Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, much encouraged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens onward from his station</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the lowlands, o’er the uplands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over snow-fields vast and vacant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Under snow-robed firs and aspens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens forward, happy-hearted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly reaches Tapio’s court-yards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Halts without at Tapio’s windows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slyly looks into her mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spies within some kindly women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forest-dames outstretched before him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All are clad in scanty raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dressed in soiled and ragged linens.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the stranger Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore sit ye, forest-mothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In your old and simple garments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In your soiled and ragged linen?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye, forsooth! are too untidy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Too unsightly your appearance</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In your tattered gowns appareled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I lived within the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There were then three mountain castles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One of horn and one of ivory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the third of wood constructed;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their walls were golden windows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Six the windows in each castle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through these windows I discovered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the host of Tapio’s mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw its fair and stately hostess;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw great Tapio’s lovely daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saw Tellervo in her beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her train of charming maidens;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All were dressed in golden raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rustled all in gold and silver.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the forest’s queenly hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still the hostess of these woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her arms wore golden bracelets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden rings upon her fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her hair were sparkling, jewels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her bead were golden fillets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her ears were golden ear-rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her neck a pearly necklace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And her braidlets, silver-tinselled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lovely hostess of the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Metsola’s enchanting mistress,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fling aside thine ugly straw-shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast away the shoes of birch-bark,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doff thy soiled and ragged linen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Doff thy gown of shabby fabric,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don the bright and festive raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Don the gown of merry-making,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I stay within thy borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While I seek my forest-booty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunt the moose of evil Hisi.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here my visit will be irksome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here thy guest will be ill-humored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting in thy fields and woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunting here the moose of Lempo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finding not the Hisi-ranger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou give me no enjoyment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should I find no joy, nor respite.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long the eve that gives no pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long the day that brings no guerdon!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Sable-bearded god of forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy hat and coat of ermine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Robe thy trees in finest fibers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deck thy groves in richest fabrics,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give the fir-trees shining silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deck with gold the slender balsams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give the spruces copper belting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the pine-trees silver girdles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give the birches golden flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deck their stems with silver fret-work,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This their garb in former ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the days and nights were brighter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the fir-trees shone like sunlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the birches like the moonbeams;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey breathed throughout the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Settled in the glens and highlands</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spices in the meadow-borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oil out-pouring from the lowlands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Forest daughter, lovely virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden maiden, fair Tulikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Second of the Tapio-daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive the game within these borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To these far-extending snow-fields.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should the reindeer be too sluggish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should the moose-deer move too slowly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut a birch-rod from the thicket,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whip them hither in their beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive the wild-moose to my hurdle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither drive the long-sought booty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hunter who is watching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting in the Hisi-forests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“When the game has started hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keep them in the proper highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hold thy magic hands before them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guard them well on either road-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the elk may not escape thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not dart adown some by-path.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should, perchance, the moose-deer wander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through some by-way of the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take him by the ears and antlers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither lead the pride of Lempo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“If the path be filled with brush-wood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast the brush-wood to the road-side;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the branches cross his pathway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Break the branches into fragments;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should a fence of fir or alder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cross the way that leads him hither.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make an opening within it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open nine obstructing fences;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the way be crossed by streamlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the path be stopped by rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make a bridge of silken fabric,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weaving webs of scarlet color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive the deer-herd gently over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead them gently o’er the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the rivers of thy forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the streams of thy dominions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou, the host of Tapio’s mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gracious host of Tapiola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sable-bearded god of woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden lord of Northland forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou, O Tapio’s worthy hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Queen of snowy woods, Mimerkki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient dame in sky-blue vesture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fenland-queen in scarlet ribbons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come I to exchange my silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To exchange my gold and silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold I have, as old as moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver of the age of sunshine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the first of years was gathered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the heat and pain of battle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will rust within my pouches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon will wear away and perish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If it be not used in trading.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long the hunter, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glided through the fen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang his songs throughout the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through three mountain glens be sang them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang the forest hostess friendly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang he, also, Tapio friendly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friendly, all the forest virgins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All of Metsola’s fair daughters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now they start the herds of Lempo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Start the wild-moose from his shelter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the realms of evil Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tapio’s highest mountain-region;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now they drive the ranger homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the open courts of Piru,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hero that is waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunting for the moose of Juutas.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the herd had reached the castle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen threw his lasso</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the antlers of the blue-moose,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Settled on the neck and shoulders</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the mighty moose of Hisi.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the hunter, Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stroked his captive’s neck in safety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the moose was well-imprisoned.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon gay Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with joyance spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Pride of forests, queen of woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Metsola’s enchanted hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely forest dame, Mielikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother-donor of the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take the gold that I have promised,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and take away the silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread thy kerchief well before me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread out here thy silken neck-wrap,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the golden treasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the shining silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>that to earth it may not settle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered on the snows of winter.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the hero went a victor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dwellings of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And addressed these words to Louhi:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have caught the moose of Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Metsola-dominions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give, O hostess, give thy daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to me thy fairest virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bride of mine to be hereafter.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave this answer to the suitor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will give to thee my daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy wife my fairest maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When for me thou’lt put a bridle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the flaming horse of Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rapid messenger of Lempo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Hisi-plains and pastures.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nothing daunted, Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened forward to accomplish</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi’s second test of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the cultivated lowlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sacred fields and forests.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Everywhere he sought the racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought the fire-expiring stallion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire out-shooting from his nostrils.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, fearless hunter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearing in his belt his bridle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his shoulders, reins and halter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finally, upon the third day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went he to the Hisi-mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Climbed, and struggled to the summit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the east he turned his glances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cast his eyes upon the sunrise,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There beheld the flaming courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the heath among the far-trees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lempo’s fire-expiring stallion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire and mingled smoke, out-shooting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his mouth, and eyes, and nostrils.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the daring Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the hero’s supplication:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ukko, thou O God above me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou that rulest all the storm-clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open thou the vault of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open windows through the ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the icy rain come falling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lot the heavy hailstones shower</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the flaming horse of Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fire-expiring stallion.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko, the benign Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard the prayer of Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke apart the dome of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rent the heights of heaven asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent the iron-hail in showers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smaller than the heads of horses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larger than the heads of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the flaming steed of Lempo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fire-expiring stallion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the terror of the Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, drawing nearer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked with care upon the courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he spake the words that follow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wonder-steed of mighty Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flaming horse of Lempo’s mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring thy mouth of gold, assenting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gently place thy head of silver</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this bright and golden halter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this silver-mounted bridle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall never harshly treat thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never make thee fly too fleetly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the way to Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the tracks of long duration,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her magic courts and stables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not lash thee on thy journey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall lead thee gently forward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive thee with the reins of kindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cover thee with silken blankets.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the fire-haired steed of Juutas,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flaming horse of mighty Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put his bead of shining silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the bright and golden bead-stall,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the silver-mounted bridle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the hero, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easy bridles Lempo’s stallion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flaming horse of evil Piru;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lays the bits within his fire-mouth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his silver head, the halter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounts the fire-expiring courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brandishes his whip of willow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens forward on his journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bounding o’er the hills and mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dashing through the valleys northward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the snow-capped hills of Lapland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the courts of Sariola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the hero, quick dismounting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stepped within the court of Louhi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the Northland hostess:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have bridled Lempo’s fire-horse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have caught the Hisi-racer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Caught the fire-expiring stallion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Piru plains and pastures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ridden him within thy borders;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have caught the moose of Lempo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have done what thou demandest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give, I pray thee, now thy daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to me thy fairest maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bride of mine to be forever.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi, hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made this answer to the suitor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will only give my daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to thee my fairest virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bride of thine to be forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When for me the swan thou killest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the river of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swimming in the black death-river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sacred stream and whirlpool;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst try one cross-bow only,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But one arrow from thy quiver.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the reckless Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Braved the third test of the hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Started out to hunt the wild-swan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunt the long-necked, graceful swimmer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Tuoni’s coal-black river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Manala’s lower regions.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the daring hunter journeyed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened off with fearless footsteps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the river of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sacred stream and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his bow upon his shoulder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his quiver and one arrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nasshut, blind and crippled shepherd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wretched shepherd of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stood beside the death-land river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the sacred stream and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guarding Tuonela’s waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting there for Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listening there for Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting long the hero’s coming.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finally he hears the footsteps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the hero on his journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears the tread of Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he journeys nearer, nearer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the river of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cataract of death-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sacred stream and whirlpool.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick the wretched shepherd, Nasshut,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the death-stream sends a serpent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like an arrow from a cross-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the heart of Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the vitals of the hero.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, little conscious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hardly knew that be was injured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these measures as he perished.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ah! unworthy is my conduct,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ah! unwisely have I acted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I did not heed my mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not take her goodly counsel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not learn her words of magic.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oh I for three words with my mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to live, and bow to suffer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this time of dire misfortune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to bear the stings of serpents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tortures of the reed of waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the stream of Tuonela!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ancient mother who hast borne me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who hast trained me from my childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn, I pray thee, where I linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where alas! thy son is lying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thy reckless hero suffers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, I pray thee, faithful mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thou quickly, thou art needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come deliver me from torture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the death-jaws of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sacred stream and whirlpool.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland’s old and wretched shepherd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nasshut, the despised protector</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the flocks of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throws the dying Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throws the hero of the islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Tuonela’s river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the blackest stream of death-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the worst of fatal whirlpools.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, wild and daring,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Helpless falls upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floating down the coal-black current,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the cataract and rapids</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the tombs of Tuonela.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the blood-stained son of death-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There Tuoni’s son and hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cuts in pieces Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chops him with his mighty hatchet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till the sharpened axe strikes flint-sparks</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the rocks within his chamber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chops the hero into fragments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into five unequal portions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throws each portion to Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Manala’s lowest kingdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words when he has ended:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Swim thou there, wild Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flow thou onward in this river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunt forever in these waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy cross-bow and thine arrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoot the swan within this empire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoot our water-birds in welcome!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the hero, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the handsome Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The untiring suitor, dieth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the river of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the death-realm of Manala.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
