<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XXXIX: Wainamoinen’s Sailing</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-39" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXIX</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Wainamoinen’s Sailing</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and faithful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou wonder-working brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us go to Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to gain the magic Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to see the lid in colors.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen gave this answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hard indeed to seize the Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither can the lid be captured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the never-pleasant Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dismal Sariola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi took away the Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried off the lid in colors</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the stone-mount of Pohyola;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hid it in the copper mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where nine locks secure the treasure.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many young roots sprout around it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grow nine fathoms deep in sand-earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One great root beneath the mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cataract a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a third beneath the castle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built upon the mount of ages.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Brother mine, and wonder-worker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us go to Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we may secure the Sampo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us build a goodly vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring the Sampo to Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring away the lid in colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the stone-berg of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the copper-bearing mountain.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the miracle lies anchored.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen thus made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“By the land the way is safer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lempo travels on the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ghastly Death upon his shoulder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sea the waves will drift us,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the storm-winds wreck our vessel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then our hands must do the rowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And our feet must steer us homeward.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Safe indeed by land to journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the way is rough and trying,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long the road and full of turnings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely is the ship on ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful to ride the billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Journey easy o’er the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sailing in a trusty vessel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should the West-wind cross our pathway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will the South-wind drive us northward.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be that as it may, my brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou dost not love the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the land then let us journey.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge me now the sword of battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge for me the mighty fire-sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may destroy the wild-beasts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frighten all the Northland people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As we journey for the Sampo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cold and dismal village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the never-pleasant Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dismal Sariola.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal forger-artist,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid the metals in the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the fire laid steel and iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the hot-coals, gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rightful measure of the metals;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set the workmen at the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lustily they plied the bellows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the wax the iron melted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the dough the hard steel softened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the water ran the silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the liquid gold flowed after.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the minstrel, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal wonder-forger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks within his magic furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the border of his oven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There beholds the fire-sword forming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees the blade with golden handle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes the weapon from the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lays it on his heavy anvil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the falling of the hammer;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forges well the blade of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well the heavy sword he tempers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ornaments the hero-weapon</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the finest gold and silver.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes to view the blade of conquest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts admiringly the fire-sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then these words the hero utters:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Does the weapon match the soldier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does the handle suit the bearer?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Yea, the blade and hilt are molded</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the wishes of the minstrel.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On the sword-point gleams the moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the blade the sun is shining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hilt the bright stars twinkle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the edge a horse is neighing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the handle plays a kitten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sheath a dog is barking.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen wields his fire-sword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tests it on the iron-mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these words the hero utters:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“With this broadsword I could quickly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cleave in twain the mount of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cut the flinty rocks asunder.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherewith shall I guard from danger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How protect myself from evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the ills by land and water?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I wear an iron armor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Belt of steel around my body?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stronger is a man in armor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Safer in a mail of copper.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the time has come to journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the never-pleasant Northland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his brother, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten to the field and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Searching for their fiery coursers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In each shining belt a bridle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a harness on their shoulders.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the woods they find a race;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the glen a steed of battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready for his master’s service.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and trusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throw the harness on the courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hitch him to the sledge of conquest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten on their journey northward;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive along the broad-sea’s margin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till they hear some one lamenting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the strand hear something wailing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the landing-place of vessels.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words in wonder, guessing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This must be some maiden weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some fair daughter thus lamenting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us journey somewhat nearer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To discover whence this wailing.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Drew they nearer, nearer, nearer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping thus to find a maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weeping on the sandy sea-shore.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was not a maiden weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But a vessel, sad, and lonely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting on the shore and wailing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why art weeping, goodly vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What the cause of thy lamenting?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou mourning for thy row-locks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is thy rigging ill-adjusted?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou weep since thou art anchored</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the shore in times of trouble?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the war-ship spake in answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“To the waters would this vessel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste upon the well-tarred rollers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a happy maiden journeys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cottage of her husband.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, alas! a goodly vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weep because I lie at anchor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weep and wail because no hero</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sets me free upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free to ride the rolling billows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It was said when I was fashioned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often sung when I was building,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That this bark should be for battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should become a mighty war-ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carry in my hull great treasures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Priceless goods across the ocean.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never have I sailed to conquest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never have I carried booty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other vessels not as worthy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the wars are ever sailing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sailing to the songs of battle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times in the summer season</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come they home with treasures laden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their hulls bring gold and silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, alas! a worthy vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many months have lain at anchor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I, a war-ship well constructed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Am decaying in the harbor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never having sailed to conquest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worms are gnawing at my vitals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my hull their dwelling-places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And ill-omened birds of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build their nests within my rigging;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Frogs and lizards of the forest</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Play about my oars and rudder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Three times better for this vessel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were he but a valley birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or an aspen on the heather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the squirrels in his branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the dogs beneath them barking!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and faithful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the ship at anchor:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Weep no more, thou goodly vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Man-of-war, no longer murmur;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt sail to Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing the war-songs of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail with us to deadly combat.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wert thou built by the Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst sail the roughest waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sidewise journey o’er the ocean;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost not need the hand to touch thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost not need the foot to turn thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Needing nothing to propel thee.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the weeping boat made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cannot sail without assistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither can my brother-vessels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail unaided o’er the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail across the waves undriven.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Should I lead thee to the broad-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou journey north unaided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail without the help of rowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail without the aid of south-winds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail without the helm to guide thee?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the wailing ship replying:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cannot sail without assistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither can my brother-vessels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail without the aid of rowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail without the help of south-winds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor without the helm to guide them.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wilt thou run with aid of oarsmen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the south-winds give assistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guided by a skillful pilot?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the war-ship:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Quickly can I course these waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my oars are manned by rowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my sails are filled with south-winds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my goodly brother-vessels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail the ocean with assistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the master holds the rudder.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left the racer on the seaside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tied him to the sacred birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung the harness on a willow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolled the vessel to the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang the ship upon the broad-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asked the boat this simple question:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou vessel, well-appearing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the mighty oak constructed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou strong to carry treasures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As in view thou art commanding?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the goodly ship made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Strong am I to carry treasures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my hull a golden cargo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I can bear a hundred oarsmen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of warriors a thousand.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then began his wondrous singing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On one side the magic vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang he youth with golden virtues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bearded youth with strength of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang them into mail of copper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the other side the vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang he silver-tinselled maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Girded them with belts of copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden rings upon their fingers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings again the great magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fills the magic ship with heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient heroes, brave and mighty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings them into narrow limits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since the young men came before them.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>At the helm himself he seated,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the last beam of the vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Steered his goodly boat in joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the willing war-ship:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Glide upon the trackless waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail away, my ship of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sail across the waves before thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speed thou like a dancing bubble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like a flower upon the billows!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set the young men to the rowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the maidens sit in waiting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eagerly the youthful heroes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend the oars and try the row-locks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the distance is not lessened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the minstrel, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set the maidens to the rowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the young men rest in waiting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eagerly the merry maidens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend the aspen-oars in rowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the distance is not lessened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the master, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set the old men to the rowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the youth remain in waiting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lustily the aged heroes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bend and try the oars of aspen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the distance is not lessened.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grasped the oars with master-magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the boat leaped o’er the surges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swiftly sped across the billows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Far and wide the oars resounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly was the distance lessened.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a rush and roar of waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen sped his vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Benches, ribs, and row-locks creaking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oars of aspen far resounding;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flap the sails like wings of moor-cocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the prow dips like a white-swan;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the rear it croaks like ravens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loud the oars and rigging rattle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Straightway ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting by the bending rudder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns his magic vessel landward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To a jutting promontory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where appears a Northland-village.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the point stands Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kaukomieli, black magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ahti, wizard of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wishing for the fish of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weeping for his fated dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For his perilous adventures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard at work upon a vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sail-yards of a fish-boat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the hunger-point and island,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the village-home deserted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good the ears of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good the wizard’s eyes for seeing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casts his vision to the South-east,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turns his eyes upon the sunset,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sees afar a wondrous rainbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Farther on, a cloudlet hanging;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the bow was a deception,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cloudlet a delusion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis a vessel swiftly sailing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis a war-ship flying northward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the blue-back of the broad-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the far-extending waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the helm the master standing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the oars a mighty hero.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the reckless Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do not know this wondrous vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not this well-constructed war-ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming from the distant Suomi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rowing for the hostile Pohya.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon wild Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called aloud in tones of thunder</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the waters to the vessel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made the distant hills re-echo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the music of his calling:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Whence this vessel on the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whose the war-ship sailing hither?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spake the master of the vessel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the reckless Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who art thou from fen or forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Senseless wizard from the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou dost not know this vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Magic war-ship of Wainola?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost not know him at the rudder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the hero at the row-locks?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the wizard, Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Well I know the helm-director,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And I recognize the rower;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and trusty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the helm directs the vessel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen does the rowing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither is the vessel sailing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither wandering, my heroes?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“We are sailing to the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to gain the magic Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to get the lid in colors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the stone-berg of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the copper-bearing mountain.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the evil Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O, thou good, old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take me with thee to Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make me third of magic heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou goest for the Sampo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goest for the lid in colors;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall prove a valiant soldier,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thy wisdom calls for fighting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am skilled in arts of warfare!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient minstrel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gave assent to Ahti’s wishes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon wild Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to Wainola’s war-ship,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing floats of aspen-timber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ships of Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus the hero of the Northland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks to reckless Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“There is aspen on my vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aspen-floats in great abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the boat is heavy-laden.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore dost thou bring the aspen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the vessel of Wainola?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen gave this answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not through caution sinks a vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor a hay-stack by its proppings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seas abound in hidden dangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy storms arise and threaten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fell destruction to the sailor</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That would brave the angry billows.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the good, old Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Therefore is this warlike vessel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built of trusty steel and copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trimmed and bound in toughest iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the winds may not destroy it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not harm my ship of magic.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
