<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XVII: Wainamoinen Finds the Lost-Word</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Wainamoinen Finds the Lost-Word</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not learn the words of magic</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In Tuoni’s gloomy regions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the kingdom of Manala.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thereupon he long debated,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well considered, long reflected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where to find the magic sayings;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a shepherd came to meet him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaking thus to Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Thou canst find of words a hundred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find a thousand wisdom-sayings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the mouth of wise Wipunen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the body of the hero;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the spot I know the foot-path,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his tomb the magic highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trodden by a host of heroes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long the distance thou must travel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sharpened points of needles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then a long way thou must journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the edges of the broadswords;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thirdly thou must travel farther</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the edges of the hatchets.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and trustful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well considered all these journeys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Travelled to the forge and smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addressed the metal-worker:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Ilmarinen, worthy blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make a shoe for me of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge me gloves of burnished copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mold a staff of strongest metal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lay the steel upon the inside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge within the might of magic;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am going on a journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To procure the magic sayings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Find the lost-words of the Master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the mouth of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the tongue of wise Wipunen.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Long ago died wise Wipunen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Disappeared these many ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lays no more his snares of copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sets no longer traps of iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot learn from him the wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot find in him the lost-words.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and hopeful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little heeding, not discouraged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his metal shoes and armor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastens forward on his journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Runs the first day fleetly onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sharpened points of needles;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Wearily he strides the second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the edges of the broadswords</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swings himself the third day forward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the edges of the hatchets.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wise Wipunen, wisdom-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient bard, and great magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his magic songs lay yonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stretched beside him, lay his sayings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his shoulder grew the aspen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On each temple grew the birch-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his mighty chin the alder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his beard grew willow-bushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his mouth the dark green fir-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the oak-tree from his forehead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, coming closer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draws his sword, lays bare his hatchet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his magic leathern scabbard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fells the aspen from his shoulder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fells the birch-tree from his temples,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his chin he fells the alder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his beard, the branching willows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his mouth the dark-green fir-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fells the oak-tree from his forehead.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now he thrusts his staff of iron</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the mouth of wise Wipunen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pries his mighty jaws asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words of master-magic:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Rise, thou master of magicians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sleep of Tuonela,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thine everlasting slumber!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wise Wipunen, ancient singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly wakens from his sleeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keenly feels the pangs of torture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the cruel staff of iron;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bites with mighty force the metal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bites in twain the softer iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot bite the steel asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opens wide his mouth in anguish.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his iron-shoes and armor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Careless walking, headlong stumbles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the spacious mouth and fauces</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the magic bard, Wipunen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise Wipunen, full of song-charms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opens wide his mouth and swallows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen and his magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shoes, and staff, and iron armor.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then outspeaks the wise Wipunen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Many things before I’ve eaten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dined on goat, and sheep, and reindeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear, and ox, and wolf, and wild-boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never in my recollection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have I tasted sweeter morsels!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the ancient Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Now I see the evil symbols,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See misfortune hanging o’er me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the darksome Hisi-hurdles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the catacombs of Kalma.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen long considered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to live and how to prosper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to conquer this condition.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his belt he wore a poniard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a handle hewn from birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the handle builds a vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Builds a boat through magic science;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this vessel rows he swiftly</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the entrails of the hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rows through every gland and vessel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the wisest of magicians.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old Wipunen, master-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Barely feels the hero’s presence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gives no heed to Wainamoinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the artist of Wainola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway sets himself to forging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sets at work to hammer metals;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes a smithy from his armor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his sleeves he makes the bellows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes the air-valve from his fur-coat,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his stockings, makes the muzzle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Uses knees instead of anvil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes a hammer of his fore-arm;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the storm-wind roars the bellows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the thunder rings the anvil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forges one day, then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forges till the third day closes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the body of Wipunen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the sorcerer’s abdomen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old Wipunen, full of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words in wonder, guessing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Who art thou of ancient heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who of all the host of heroes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many heroes I have eaten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of men a countless number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have not eaten such as thou art;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoke arises from my nostrils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my mouth the fire is streaming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my throat are iron-clinkers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go, thou monster, hence to wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flee this place, thou plague of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere I go to seek thy mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell the ancient dame thy mischief;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She shall bear thine evil conduct,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great the burden she shall carry;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great a mother’s pain and anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When her child runs wild and lawless;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot comprehend the meaning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor this mystery unravel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why thou camest here, O monster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Camest here to give me torture.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art thou Hisi sent from heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some calamity from Ukko?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art, perchance, some new creation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ordered here to do me evil?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou art some evil genius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some calamity from Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent to me by my Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then am I resigned to suffer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>God does not forsake the worthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does not ruin those that trust him,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never are the good forsaken.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If by man thou wert created,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If some hero sent thee hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall learn thy race of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall destroy thy wicked tribe-folk.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thence arose the violation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence arose the first destruction,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence came all the evil-doings:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the neighborhood of wizards,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the homes of the magicians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the eaves of vicious spirits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the haunts of fortune-tellers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the cabins of the witches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the castles of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the bottom of Manala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the ground with envy swollen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From Ingratitude’s dominions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the rocky shoals and quicksands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the marshes filled with danger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the cataract’s commotion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the bear-caves in the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wolves within the thickets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the roarings of the pine-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the burrows of the fox-dog,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the woodlands of the reindeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the eaves and Hisi-hurdles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the battles of the giants,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From uncultivated pastures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the billows of the oceans,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the streams of boiling waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the waterfalls of Rutya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the limits of the storm-clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the pathways of the thunders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the flashings of the lightnings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the distant plains of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fatal stream and whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the birthplace of Tuoni.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Art thou coming from these places?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou, evil, hastened hither,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the heart of sinless hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To devour my guiltless body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To destroy this wisdom-singer?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Get thee hence, thou dog of Lempo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave, thou monster from Manala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flee from mine immortal body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave my liver, thing of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my body cease thy forging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cease this torture of my vitals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me rest in peace and slumber.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should I want in means efficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should I lack the magic power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To outroot thine evil genius,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall call a better hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call upon a higher power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To remove this dire misfortune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To annihilate this monster.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall call the will of woman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fields, the old-time heroes?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mounted heroes from the sand-hills,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to rescue me from danger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From these pains and ceaseless tortures.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If this force prove inefficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should not drive thee from my body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, thou forest, with thy heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, ye junipers and pine-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With your messengers of power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, ye mountains, with your wood-nymphs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, ye lakes, with all your mermaids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, ye hundred ocean-spearmen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, torment this son of Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and kill this evil monster.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If this call is inefficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does not drive thee from my vitals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise, thou ancient water-mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy blue-cap from the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the seas, the lakes, the rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring protection to thy hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comfort bring and full assistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I guiltless may not suffer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May not perish prematurely.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shouldst thou brave this invocation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kapè, daughter of Creation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, thou beauteous, golden maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oldest of the race of women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and witness my misfortunes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and turn away this evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, remove this biting torment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take away this plague of Piru.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If this call be disregarded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou wilt not leave me guiltless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ukko, on the arch of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the thunder-cloud dominions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come thou quickly, thou art needed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, protect thy tortured hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drive away this magic demon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banish ever his enchantment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his sword and flaming furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his fire-enkindling bellows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Go, thou demon, hence to wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flee, thou plague of Northland heroes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never come again for shelter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nevermore build thou thy dwelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the body of Wipunen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take at once thy habitation</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the regions of thy kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy distant fields and firesides;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thy journey thou hast ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gained the borders of thy country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gained the meads of thy Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give a signal of thy coming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rumble like the peals of thunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glisten like the gleam of lightning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knock upon the outer portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter through the open windows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Glide about the many chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seize the host and seize the hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Knock their evil beads together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wring their necks and hurl their bodies</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the black-dogs of the forest.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should this prove of little value,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hover like the bird of battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the dwellings of the master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scare the horses from the mangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the troughs affright the cattle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Twist their tails, and horns, and forelocks,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurl their carcasses to Lempo.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If some scourge the winds have sent me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sent me on the air of spring-tide,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought me by the frosts of winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly journey whence thou camest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the air-path of the heavens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Perching not upon some aspen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Resting not upon the birch-tree;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fly away to copper mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the copper-winds may nurse thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waves of ether, thy protection.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Didst those come from high Jumala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the hems of ragged snow-clouds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick ascend beyond the cloud-space,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly journey whence thou camest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the snow-clouds, crystal-sprinkled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the twinkling stars of heaven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There thy fire may burn forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There may flash thy forked lightnings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the Sun’s undying furnace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wert thou sent here by the spring-floods,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driven here by river-torrents?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly journey whence thou camest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly hasten to the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the borders of the rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ancient water-mountain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the floods again may rock thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy water-mother nurse thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Didst thou come from Kalma’s kingdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the castles of the death-land?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste thou back to thine own country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Kalma-halls and castles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fields with envy swollen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where contending armies perish.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Art thou from the Hisi-woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From ravines in Lempo’s forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the thickets of the pine-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dwellings of the fir-glen?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick retrace thine evil footsteps</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dwellings of thy master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the thickets of thy kindred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There thou mayest dwell at pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till thy house decays about thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till thy walls shall mould and crumble.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Evil genius, thee I banish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Got thee hence, thou horrid monster,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the caverns of the white-bear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the deep abysm of serpents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the vales, and swamps, and fenlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ever-silent waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the hot-springs of the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dead-seas of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the lifeless lakes and rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sacred stream and whirlpool.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shouldst thou find no place of resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will banish thee still farther,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the Northland’s distant borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the broad expanse of Lapland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the ever-lifeless deserts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the unproductive prairies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sunless, moonless, starless, lifeless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dark abyss of Northland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This for thee, a place befitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pitch thy tents and feast forever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dead plains of Pohyola.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shouldst thou find no means of living,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will banish thee still farther,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the cataract of Rutya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fire-emitting whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the firs are ever falling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the windfalls of the forest;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swim hereafter in the waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the fire-emitting whirlpool,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whirl thou ever in the current</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the cataract’s commotion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In its foam and boiling waters.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should this place be unbefitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will drive thee farther onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Tuoni’s coal-black river,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the endless stream of Mana,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thou shalt forever linger;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst never leave Manala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should I not thy head deliver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should I never pay thy ransom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst never safely journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through nine brother-rams abutting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through nine brother-bulls opposing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through nine brother-stallions thwarting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou canst not re-cross Death-river</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thickly set with iron netting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Interlaced with threads of copper.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shouldst thou ask for steeds for saddle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou need a fleet-foot courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will give thee worthy racers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will give thee saddle-horses;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil Hisi has a charger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crimson mane, and tail, and foretop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire emitting from his nostrils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As he prances through his pastures;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoofs are made of strongest iron,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Legs are made of steel and copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly scales the highest mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Darts like lightning through the valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a skilful master rides him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Should this steed be insufficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will give thee Lempo’s snow-shoes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give thee Hisi’s shoes of elm-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to thee the staff of Piru,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That with these thou mayest journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into Hisi’s courts and castles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the woods and fields of Juutas;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the rocks should rise before thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dash the flinty rocks in pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurl the fragments to the heavens;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the branches cross thy pathway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make them turn aside in greeting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If some mighty hero hail thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurl him headlong to the woodlands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hasten hence, thou thing of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heinous monster, leave my body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the breaking of the morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the Sun awakes from slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the sinning of the cuckoo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste away, thou plague of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste along the track of moonbeams,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wander hence, forever wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the darksome fields or Pohya.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“If at once thou dost not leave me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will send the eagle’s talons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Send to thee the beaks of vultures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To devour thine evil body,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hurl thy skeleton to Hisi.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Much more quickly cruel Lempo</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left my vitals when commanded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I called the aid of Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called the help of my Creator.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flee, thou motherless offendant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flee, thou fiend of Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flee, thou hound without a master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the morning sun arises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the Moon withdraws to slumber!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, ancient hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks at last to old Wipunen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Satisfied am I to linger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these old and spacious caverns,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pleasant here my home and dwelling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my meat I have thy tissues,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have thy heart, and spleen, and liver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my drink the blood of ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goodly home for Wainamoinen.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I shall set my forge and bellows</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Deeper, deeper in thy vitals;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall swing my heavy hammer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swing it with a greater power</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy heart, and lungs, and liver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall never, never leave thee</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till I learn thine incantations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn thy many wisdom-sayings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn the lost-words of the Master;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never must these words be bidden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Earth must never lose this wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though the wisdom-singers perish.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Old Wipunen, wise magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ancient prophet, filled with power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opens full his store of knowledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lifts the covers from his cases,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with old-time incantations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with songs of times primeval,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with ancient wit and wisdom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings the very oldest folk-songs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings the origin of witchcraft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings of Earth and its beginning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings the first of all creations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings the source of good and evil</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sung alas! by youth no longer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only sung in part by heroes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these days of sin and sorrow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Evil days our land befallen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings the orders of enchantment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How, upon the will of Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By command of the Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the air was first divided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the water came from ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the earth arose from water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How from earth came vegetation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fish, and fowl, and man, and hero.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sings again the wise Wipunen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the Moon was first created,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the Sun was set in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the colors of the rainbow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the ether’s crystal pillars,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the skies with stars were sprinkled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then again sings wise Wipunen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings in miracles of concord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings in magic tones of wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never was there heard such singing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Songs he sings in countless numbers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift his notes as tongues of serpents,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the distant hills re-echo;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings a third from dawn till evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings from evening till the morning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen all the stars of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Moon stands still and listens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fall the waves upon the deep-sea,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the bay the tides cease rising,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stop the rivers in their courses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stops the waterfall of Rutya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even Jordan ceases flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the Wuoksen stops and listens.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well had learned the magic sayings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned the ancient songs and legends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned the words of ancient wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned the lost-words of the Master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well had learned the secret doctrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He prepared to leave the body</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the wisdom-bard, Wipunen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the bosom of the master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave the wonderful enchanter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the hero, Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O, thou Antero Wipunen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Open wide thy mouth and fauces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have found the magic lost-words,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will leave thee now forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thee and thy wondrous singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will return to Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Wainola’s fields and firesides.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Wipunen spake in answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Many are the things I’ve eaten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eaten bear, and elk, and reindeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eaten ox, and wolf, and wild-boar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eaten man, and eaten hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never, never have I eaten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a thing as Wainamoinen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast found what thou desirest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the three words of the Master;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Go in peace, and ne’er returning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take my blessing on thy going.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the bard Wipunen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Opens wide his mouth, and wider;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the good, old Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway leaves the wise enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaves Wipunen’s great abdomen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the mouth he glides and journeys</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the hills and vales of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift as red-deer or the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swift as yellow-breasted marten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the firesides of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the plains of Kalevala.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Straightway hastes he to the smithy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his brother, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the iron-artist greets him:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Hast thou found the long-lost wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou heard the secret doctrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou learned the master magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How to fasten in the ledges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How the stern should be completed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>How complete the ship’s forecastle?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wainamoinen thus made answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I have learned of words a hundred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned a thousand incantations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hidden deep for many ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned the words of ancient wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the keys of secret doctrine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the lost-words of the Master.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, magic-builder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway journeys to his vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the spot of magic labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly fastens in the ledges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Firmly binds the stern together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And completes the boat’s forecastle.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the ancient Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Built the boat with magic only,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with magic launched his vessel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Using not the hand to touch it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Using not the foot to move it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Using not the knee to turn it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Using nothing to propel it.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the third task was completed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the hostess of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dowry for the Maid of Beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sitting on the arch of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the bow of many colors.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
