<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XI: Lemminkainen’s Lament</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-11" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Lemminkainen’s Lament</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>This the time to sing of Ahti,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Son of Lempo, Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Also known as Lemminkainen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ahti was the king of islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew amid the island-dwellings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the site of his dear mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the borders of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the points of promontories.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ahti fed upon the salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed upon the ocean whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus became a mighty hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his veins the blood of ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Read erect and form commanding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Growth of mind and body perfect</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But alas! he had his failings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bad indeed his heart and morals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roaming in unworthy places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Staying days and nights in sequences</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the homes of merry maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the dances of the virgins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the maids of braided tresses.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Up in Sahri lived a maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lived the fair and winsome Kulli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lovely as a summer-flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a kingly house descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew to perfect form and beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Living in her father’s cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Home of many ancient heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful was she and queenly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Praised throughout the whole of Ehstland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From afar men came to woo her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the birthplace of the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the household of her mother.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For his son the Day-star wooes her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she will not go to Sun-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not shine beside the Day-star,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his haste to bring the summer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For her son, the bright Moon wooes her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she will not go to Moon-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the bright Moon will not glimmer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not run through boundless ether.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>For his son the Night-star wooes her,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But she will not go to Star-land,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not twinkle in the starlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the dreary nights in winter.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lovers come from distant Ehstland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others come from far-off Ingern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But they cannot win the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer that she gives them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Vainly are your praises lavished</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vainly is your silver offered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wealth and praise are no temptation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never shall I go to Ehstland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never shall I go a-rowing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the waters of the Ingern,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall not cross the Sahri-waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never eat the fish of Ehstland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never taste the Ehstland viands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ingerland shall never see me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not row upon her rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Will not step within her borders;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunger there, and fell starvation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wood is absent, fuel wanting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither water, wheat, nor barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even rye is not abundant.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lemminkainen of the islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warlike hero, Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Undertakes to win the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woo and win the Sahri-flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Win a bride so highly honored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Win the maid with golden tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Win the Sahri maid of beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But his mother gives him warning:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Nay,” replies his gray-haired mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do not woo, my son beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Maiden of a higher station;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She will never make thee happy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her lineage of Sahri.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spake the hero, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of Kaukomieli:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Should I come from lowly station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Though my tribe is not the highest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall woo to please my fancy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woo the maiden fair and lovely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose a wife for worth and beauty.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the anxious mother’s answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Lemminkainen, son beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen to advice maternal:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not go to distant Sahri,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To her tribe of many branches;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the maidens there will taunt thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the women will deride thee.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lemminkainen, little hearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answers thus his mother’s pleading:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will still the sneers of women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silence all the taunts of maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will crush their haughty bosoms,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smite the hands and cheeks of infants;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely this will check their insults,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fitting ending to derision!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the mother:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe is me, my son beloved!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woe is me, my life hard-fated!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou taunt the Sahri daughters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or insult the maids of virtue,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou laugh them to derision,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There will rise a great contention,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fierce the battle that will follow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the hosts of Sahri-suitors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Armed in thousands will attack thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And will slay thee for thy folly.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Nothing listing, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heeding not his mother’s warning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led his war-horse from the stables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly hitched the fiery charger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleetly drove upon his journey,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the distant Sahri-village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to woo the Sahri-flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to win the Bride of Beauty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>All the aged Sahri-women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the young and lovely maidens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laughed to scorn the coming stranger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Driving careless through the alleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wildly driving through the court-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now upsetting in the gate-way,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaking shaft, and hame, and runner.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the fearless Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mouth awry and visage wrinkled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shook his sable locks and answered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Never in my recollection</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have I heard or seen such treatment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never have I been derided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never suffered sneers of women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never suffered scorn of virgins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in my immortal life-time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is there any place befitting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the Sahri-plains and pastures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where to join in songs and dances?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is there here a hall for pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the Sahri-maidens linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merry maids with braided tresses?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the Sahri-maidens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Answered from their promontory.,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Room enough is there in Sahri,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Room upon the Sahri-pastures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Room for pleasure-halls and dances;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing and dance upon our meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be a shepherd on the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shepherd-boys have room for dancing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Indolent the Sahri-children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the colts are fat and frisky.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Little caring, Lemminkainen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Entered service there as shepherd,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the daytime on the pastures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the evening, making merry</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the games of lively maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the dances with the virgins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the maids with braided tresses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus it was that Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the shepherd, Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly hushed the women’s laughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly quenched the taunts of maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly silenced their derision.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the dames and Sahri-daughters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon were feasting Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At his side they danced and lingered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only was there one among them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One among the Sahri-virgins,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Harbored neither love nor wooers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Favored neither gods nor heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the lovely maid Kyllikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the Sahri’s fairest flower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen, full of pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Handsome hero, Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rowed a hundred boats in pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pulled a thousand oars to fragments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While he wooed the Maid of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tried to win the fair Kyllikki.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Finally the lovely maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairest daughter of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addresses Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why dost linger here, thou weak one,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why dost murmur on these borders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why come wooing at my fireside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wooing me in belt of copper?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no time to waste upon thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather give this stone its polish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather would I turn the pestle</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the heavy sandstone mortar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather sit beside my mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dwellings of my father.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never shall I heed thy wooing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither wights nor whisks I care for,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sooner have a slender husband</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I have a slender body;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wish to have him fine of figure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since perchance I am well-shapen;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wish to have him tall and stately,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since my form perchance is queenly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never waste thy time in wooing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Saliri’s maid and favored flower.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Time had gone but little distance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scarcely had a month passed over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When upon a merry evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the maidens meet for dancing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the glen beyond the meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On a level patch of verdure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Came too soon the maid Kyllikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sahri’s pride, the Maid of Beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly followed Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his stallion proudly prancing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleetest racer of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fleetly drives beyond the meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the maidens meet for dancing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snatches quick the maid Kyllikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the settle seats the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quickly draws the leathern cover,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And adjusts the brichen cross-bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whips his courser to a gallop.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a rush, and roar, and rattle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speeds he homeward like the storm-wind,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words to those that listen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Never, never, anxious maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must ye give the information,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I carried off Kyllikki</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my distant home and kindred.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If ye do not heed this order,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye shall badly fare as maidens;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall sing to war your suitors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing them under spear and broadsword,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That for months, and years, and ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never ye will see their faces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never hear their merry voices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will they tread these uplands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will they join these dances,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will they drive these highways.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sad the wailing of Kyllikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sad the weeping flower of Sahri!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen to her tearful pleading:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Give, O give me back my freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Free me from the throes of thralldom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let this maiden wander homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By some foot-path let me wander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my father who is grieving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To my mother who is weeping;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me go or I will curse thee!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou wilt not give me freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt not let me wander homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where my loved ones wait my coming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have seven stalwart brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven sons of father’s brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven sons of mother’s sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who pursue the tracks of red-deer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hunt the hare upon the heather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They will follow thee and slay thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I’ll gain my wished-for freedom.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lemminkainen, little heeding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would not grant the maiden’s wishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Would not heed her plea for mercy.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spake again the waiting virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride and beauty of the Northland:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Joyful was I with my kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joyful born and softly nurtured</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merrily I spent my childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy I, in virgin-freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the dwelling of my father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the bedside of my mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my lineage in Sahri;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But alas! all joy has vanished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my happiness departed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my maiden beauty waneth</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since I met thine evil spirit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shameless hero of dishonor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cruel fighter of the islands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merciless in civil combat.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spake the hero, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words of Kaukomieli:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dearest maiden, fair Kyllikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>My sweet strawberry of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still thine anguish, cease thy weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be thou free from care and sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never shall I do thee evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will my hands maltreat thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will mine arms abuse thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will my tongue revile thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will my heart deceive thee.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Tell me why thou hast this anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why thou hast this bitter sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why this sighing and lamenting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tell me why this wail of sadness?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Banish all thy cares and sorrows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dry thy tears and still thine anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have cattle, food, and shelter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have home, and friends, and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kine upon the plains and uplands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the marshes berries plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Strawberries upon the mountains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have kine that need no milking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Handsome kine that need no feeding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful if not well-tended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Need not tie them up at evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Need not free them in the morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Need not hunt them, need not feed them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Need not give them salt nor water.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thinkest thou my race is lowly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dost thou think me born ignoble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Does my lineage agrieve thee?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not born in lofty station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a tribe of noble heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a worthy race descended;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I have a sword of fervor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And a spear yet filled with courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Surely these are well descended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These were born from hero-races,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sharpened by the mighty Hisi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the gods were forged and burnished;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore will I give thee greatness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greatness of my race and nation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my broadsword filled with fervor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my spear still filled with courage.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Anxiously the sighing maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus addresses Lemminkainen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O thou Ahti, son of Lempo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou take this trusting virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As thy faithful life-companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take me under thy protection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be to me a faithful husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swear to me an oath of honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thou wilt not go to battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When for gold thou hast a longing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou wishest gold and silver?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is Lemminkainen’s answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“I will swear an oath of honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I’ll never go to battle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When for gold I feel a longing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I wish for gold and silver.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swear thou also on thine honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt go not to the village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When desire for dance impels thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt not visit village-dances.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus the two made oath together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Registered their vows in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vowed before omniscient Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ne’er to go to war vowed Ahti,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never to the dance, Kyllikki.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lemminkainen, full of joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snapped his whip above his courser,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whipped his racer to a gallop,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And these words the hero uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Fare ye well, ye Sahri-meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roots of firs, and stumps of birch-trees.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I wandered through in summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I travelled o’er in winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where ofttimes in rainy seasons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the evening hour I lingered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I sought to win the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought to win the Maid of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairest of the Sahri-flowers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fare ye well, ye Sahri-woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seas and oceans, lakes and rivers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Vales and mountains, isles and inlets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once the home of fair Kyllikki!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Quick the racer galloped homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Galloped on along the highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Toward the meadows of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the plains of Kalevala.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>As they neared the Ahti-dwellings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus Kyllikki spake in sorrow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Cold and drear is thy cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seeming like a place deserted;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who may own this dismal cabin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who the one so little honored?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Spake the hero, Lemminkainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words that Ahti uttered:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Do not grieve about my cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no care about my chambers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall build thee other dwellings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall fashion them much better,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beams, and posts, and sills, and rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashioned from the sacred birch-wood.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now they reach the home of Ahti,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lemminkainen’s home and birthplace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter they his mother’s cottage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There they meet his aged mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words the mother uses:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Long indeed hast thou been absent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long in foreign lands hast wandered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long in Sahri thou hast lingered!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This is Lemminkainen’s answer:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“All the host of Sahri-women,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the chaste and lovely maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the maids with braided tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well have paid for their derision,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For their scorn and for their laughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That they basely heaped upon me.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have brought the best among them</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my sledge to this thy cottage;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well I wrapped her in my fur-robes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kept her warm enwrapped in bear-skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought her to my mother’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As my faithful life-companion;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I paid the scornful maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Paid them well for their derision.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Cherished mother of my being,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have found the long-sought jewel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have won the Maid of Beauty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spread our couch with finest linen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our heads the softest pillows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On our table rarest viands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So that I may dwell in pleasure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my spouse, the bride of honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the pride of distant Sahri.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the answer of the mother:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Be thou praised, O gracious Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loudly praised, O thou Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since thou givest me a daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ahti’s bride, my second daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can stir the fire at evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can weave me finest fabrics,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can twirl the useful spindle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can rinse my silken ribbons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who can full the richest garments.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Son beloved, praise thy Maker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the winning of this virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride and joy of distant Sahri</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kind indeed is thy Creator,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wise the ever-knowing Ukko!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pure the snow upon the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Purer still thy Bride of Beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>White the foam upon the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whiter still her virgin-spirit;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Graceful on the lakes, the white-swan,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still more graceful, thy companion:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful the stars in heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still more beautiful, Kyllikki.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larger make our humble cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wider build the doors and windows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fashion thou the ceilings higher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Decorate the walls in beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now that thou a bride hast taken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From a tribe of higher station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Purest maiden of creation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the meadow-lands of Sahri,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the upper shores of Northland.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
