<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XXII: The Bride’s Farewell</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Bride’s Farewell</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>When the marriage was completed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the many guests had feasted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the wedding of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the Dismal-land carousal,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the hostess of Pohyola</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the blacksmith, Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore, bridegroom, dost thou linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why art waiting, Northland hero?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sittest for the father’s pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For affection of the mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the splendor of the maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the beauty of the daughter?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noble son-in-law and brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait thou longer, having waited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long already for the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thine affianced is not ready,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not prepared, thy life-companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only are her tresses braided.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Chosen bridegroom, pride of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait thou longer, having waited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long already for the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy beloved is preparing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only is one hand made ready.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Famous artist, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait still longer, having waited</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long already for the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy beloved is not ready,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only is one foot in fur-shoes,”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake again the ancient Louhi:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Chosen suitor of my daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast thrice in kindness waited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wait no longer for the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thy beloved now is ready,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well prepared thy life-companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fairy Maiden of the Rainbow.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Beauteous daughter, join thy suitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Follow him, thy chosen husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Very near is the uniting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near indeed thy separation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy hand the honored bridegroom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the door he waits to lead thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guide thee to his home and kindred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the gate his steed is waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Restless champs his silver bridle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the sledge awaits thy presence.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou wert anxious for a suitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to accept his offer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wert in haste to take his jewels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Place his rings upon thy fingers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now, fair daughter, keep thy promise;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his sledge, with happy footsteps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hie in haste to join the bridegroom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gaily journey to the village</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy chosen life-companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy suitor, Ilmarinen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little hast thou looked about thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast not raised thine eyes above thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauteous maiden of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou made a rueful bargain,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Full of wailing thine engagement,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy marriage full of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy father’s ancient cottage</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art leaving now forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leaving also friends and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the, blacksmith, Ilmarinen?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O how beautiful thy childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy father’s dwelling-places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nurtured like a tender flower,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the strawberry in spring-time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soft thy couch and sweet thy slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm thy fires and rich thy table;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fields came corn in plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the highlands, milk and berries,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheat and barley in abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fish, and fowl, and hare, and bacon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy father’s fields and forests.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Never wert thou, child, in sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never hadst thou grief nor trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy cares were left to fir-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy worry to the copses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy weeping to the willows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy sighing to the lindens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy thinking to the aspens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the birches on the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Light and airy as the leaflet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a butterfly in summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ruddy as a mountain-berry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful as vernal flowers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now thou leavest home and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wanderest to other firesides,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goest to another mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other sisters, other brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goest to a second father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the servant-folk of strangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy native hills and lowlands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There and here the homes will differ,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happier thy mother’s hearth-stone;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other horns will there be sounded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other portals there swing open,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other hinges there be creaking;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There the doors thou canst not enter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the daughters of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst not tend the fires and ovens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As will please the minds of strangers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Didst thou think, my fairest maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou couldst wed and on the morrow</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Couldst return, if thou shouldst wish it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy father’s court and dwelling?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for one, nor two, nor three days,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wilt thou leave thy mother’s chambers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thy sisters and thy brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thy father’s hills and lowlands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long the time the wife must wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many months and years must wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Work, and struggle, all her life long,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even though the mother liveth.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Great, indeed, must be the changes</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou comest back to Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changed, thy friends and nearest kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changed, thy father’s ancient dwellings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Changed, the valleys and the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other birds will sing thy praises!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the mother thus had spoken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the daughter spake, departing:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“In my early days of childhood</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often I intoned these measures:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Art a virgin, yet no virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guided by an aged mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a brother’s fields and forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the mansion of a father!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only wilt become a virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only when thou hast a suitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only when thou wedst a hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One foot on the father’s threshold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the other for the snow-sledge</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will speed thee and thy husband</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his native vales and highlands!’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“I have wished thus many summers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang it often in my childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoped for this as for the flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome as the birds of spring-time.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus fulfilled are all my wishes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Very near is my departure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One foot on my father’s threshold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the, other for the journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my husband to his people;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot understand the reason</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That has changed my former feelings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot leave thee now with gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot go with great rejoicing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my dear, old home and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where as maiden I have lingered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the courts where I was nurtured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my father’s band and guidance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my faithful mother’s counsel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now I go, a maid of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy-hearted to the bridegroom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the bride of Night in winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the ice upon the rivers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Such is not the mind of others,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other brides of Northland heroes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others do not leave unhappy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no tears, nor cares, nor sorrows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I alas! must weep and murmur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carry to my grave great sadness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heart as dark as Death’s black river.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Such the feelings of the happy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such the minds of merry maidens:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the early dawn of spring-time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the rising Sun in summer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No such radiance awaits me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my young heart filled with terror;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happiness is not my portion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the flat-shore of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the dark rift of the storm-cloud,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the cheerless nights of winter!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreary is the day in autumn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dreary too the autumn evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Still more dreary is my future!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>An industrious old maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever guarding home and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words of doubtful comfort:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Dost thou, beauteous bride, remember,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst thou not recall my counsels?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These the words that I have taught thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Look not joyfully for suitors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never heed the tongues of wooers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look not in the eyes of charmers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At their feet let fall thy vision.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He that hath a mouth for sweetness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He that hath an eye for beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Offers little that will comfort;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lempo sits upon his forehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his mouth dwells dire Tuoni.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus, fair bride, did I advise thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus advised my sister’s daughter:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Should there come the best of suitors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Noblest wooers, proudest lovers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to all these wisdom-sayings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thine answer be as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Never will I think it wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will it be my pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To become a second daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linger with my husband’s mother;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never shall I leave my father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never wander forth to bondage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the bidding of a bridegroom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never shall I be a servant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wife and slave to any hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will I be submissive</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the orders of a husband.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Fairest bride, thou didst not heed me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gav’st no thought to my advices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst not listen to my counsel;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wittingly thy feet have wandered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Into boiling tar and water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hastened to thy suitor’s snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bear-dens of thy husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his sledge to be ill-treated,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried to his native country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bondage of his people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There, a subject to his mother.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast left thy mother’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the schooling of the master;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hard indeed the master’s teachings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little else than constant torture;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready for thee are his bridles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready for thy bands the shackles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were not forged for any other;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Soon, indeed, thou’lt feel the hardness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel the weight of thy misfortune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feel thy second father’s censure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his wife’s inhuman treatment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hear the cold words or thy brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quail before thy haughty sister.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Listen, bride, to what I tell thee:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy home thou wert a jewel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wert thy father’s pride and pleasure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Moonlight,’ did thy father call thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy mother called thee ‘Sunshine,’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Sea-foam’ did thy brother call thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy sister called thee ‘Flower.’</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou leavest home and kindred</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Goest to a second mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often she will give thee censure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never treat thee as her daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rarely will she give thee counsel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will she sound thy praises.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Brush-wood,’ will the father call thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Sledge of Rags,’ thy husband’s mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Flight of Stairs,’ thy stranger brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Scare-crow,’ will the sister call thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sister of thy blacksmith-husband;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wilt think of my good counsels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then wilt wish in tears and murmurs,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That as steam thou hadst ascended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That as smoke thy soul had risen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That as sparks thy life had vanished.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a bird thou canst not wander</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From thy nest to circle homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst not fall and die like leaflets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As the sparks thou canst not perish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the smoke thou canst not vanish.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Youthful bride, and darling sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast bartered all thy friendships,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast exchanged thy loving father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast left thy faithful mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the mother of thy husband;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast exchanged thy loving brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast renounced thy gentle sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the kindred of thy suitor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast exchanged thy snow-white covers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the rocky couch of sorrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast exchanged these crystal waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the waters of Wainola;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast renounced these sandy sea-shores</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the muddy banks of Kalew;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland glens thou hast forsaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy husband’s barren meadows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast left thy berry-mountains</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the stubble-fields and deserts.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thou, O maiden, hast been thinking</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wouldst happy be in wedlock;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither work, nor care, nor sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From this night would be thy portion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With thy husband for protection.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to sleep art thou conducted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not to happiness, nor joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wakefulness, thy night-companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy day-attendant, trouble;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often thou wilt drink of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often long for vanished pleasures.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“When at home thou hadst no head-gear,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hadst also little sadness;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thy couch was not of linen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>No unhappiness came nigh thee;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Head-gear brings but pain and sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linen breeds bad dispositions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Linen brings but deeps of anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the flax untimely mourning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Happy in her home, the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy at her father’s fireside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the master in his mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy with her bows and arrows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>’Tis not thus with married women;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brides of heroes may be likened</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the prisoners of Moskva,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Held in bondage by their masters.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“As a wife, must weep and labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carry trouble on both shoulders;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the next hour passes over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must tend the fire and oven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must prepare thy husband’s dinner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must direct thy master’s servants.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thine evening meal is ready,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou must search for bidden wisdom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the brain of perch and salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the mouths of ocean whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gather wisdom from the cuckoo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Canst not learn it from thy mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mother dear of seven daughters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot find among her treasures</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where were born the human instincts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where were born the minds of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence arose the maiden’s beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence the beauty of her tresses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why all life revives in spring-time.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Weep, O weep, my pretty young bride.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou weepest, weep sincerely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weep great rivers from thine eyelids,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Floods of tears in field and fallow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lakelets in thy father’s dwelling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weep thy rooms to overflowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shed thy tears in great abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest thou weepest on returning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy native hills and valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou visitest thy father</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the smoke of waning glory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his arm a withered tassel.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Weep, O weep, my lovely maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou weepest, weep in earnest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weep great rivers from thine eyelids;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou dost not weep sincerely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt weep on thy returning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy Northland home and kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou visitest thy mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Old and breathless near the hurdles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her arms a barley-bundle.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Weep, O weep, sweet bride of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou weepest, weep profusely;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou dost not weep in earnest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt weep on thy returning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy native vales and highlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou visitest thy brother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lying wounded by the way-side,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In his hand but empty honors.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Weep, O weep, my sister’s daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weep great rivers from thine eyelids;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If thou dost not weep sufficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt weep on thy returning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the scenes of happy childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thou visitest thy sister</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lying, prostrate in the meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her hand a birch-wood mallet.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When the ancient maid had ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the young bride sighed in anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway fell to bitter weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words in deeps of sorrow:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O, ye sisters, my beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye companions of my childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playmates of my early summers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen to your sister’s counsel:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot comprehend the reason,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why my mind is so dejected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why this weariness and sadness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This untold and unseen torture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot understand the meaning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this mighty weight of sorrow!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Differently I had thought it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had hoped for greater pleasures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I had hoped to sing as cuckoos,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hill-tops call and echo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I had attained this station,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reached at last the goal expectant;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I am not like the cuckoo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing, merry on the hill-tops;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am like the songless blue-duck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As she swims upon the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swims upon the cold, cold ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Icicles upon her pinions.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ancient father, gray-haired mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither do ye wish to lead me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whither take this bride, thy daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That this sorrow may pass over,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where this heavy heart may lighten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where this grief may turn to gladness?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better it had been, O mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst thou nursed a block of birch-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hadst thou clothed the colored sandstone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rather than this hapless maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the fulness of these sorrows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this keen and killing trouble.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many sympathizers tell me:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>‘Foolish bride, thou art ungrateful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not grieve, thou child of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast little cause for weeping.’</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“O, deceive me not, my people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not argue with me falsely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For alas! I have more troubles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the waterfalls have pebbles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the Ingerland has willows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than the Suomi-hills have berries;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never could the Pohya plow-horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pull this mighty weight of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaking not his birchen cross-bar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Breaking not his heavy collar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never could the Northland reindeer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heavy shod and stoutly harnessed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Draw this load of care and trouble.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>By the stove a babe was playing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the young child spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Why, O fair bride, art thou weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why these tears of pain and sadness?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave thy troubles to the elk-herds,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy grief to sable fillies,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the steeds of iron bridles</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bear the burden of thine anguish,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horses have much larger foreheads,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larger shoulders, stronger sinews,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And their necks are made for labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stronger are their bones and muscles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let them bear thy heavy burdens.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is little good in weeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Useless are thy tears of sorrow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Art not led to swamps and lowlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor to banks of little rivers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou art led to fields of flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led to fruitful trees and forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Led away from beer of Pohya</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the sweeter mead of Kalew.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy shoulder waits thy husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy right side, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Constant friend and life-protector,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He will guard thee from all evil;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Husband ready, steed in waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold-and-silver-mounted harness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hazel-birds that sing and flutter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the courser’s yoke and cross-bar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrushes also sing and twitter</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merrily on hame and collar,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven bluebirds, seven cuckoos,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing thy wedding-march in concord.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Be no longer full of sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dry thy tears, thou bride of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast found a noble husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better wilt thou fare than ever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the side of Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Artist husband, metal-master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bread-provider of thy table,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the arm of the fish-catcher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the breast of the elk-hunter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the side of the bear-killer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast won the best of suitors,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast obtained a mighty hero;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never idle is his cross-bow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the nails his quivers hang not,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither are his dogs in kennel,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Active agents is his bunting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice within the budding spring-time</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the early hours of morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He arises from his fare-couch,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From his slumber in the brush-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thrice within the sowing season,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his eyes the deer has fallen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the branches brushed his vesture,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his locks been combed by fir-boughs.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten homeward with thy husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where thy hero’s friends await thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where his forests sing thy welcome.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Ilmarinen there possesses</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the birds that fly in mid-air,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the beasts that haunt the woodlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that feed upon the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All that graze on hill and valley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sheep and cattle by the thousands;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet the grass upon his meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweet the barley in his uplands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the lowlands corn abundant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wheat upon the elm-wood fallows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the streamlets rye is waving,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waving grain on many acres,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his mountains gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rich his mines of shining copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Highlands filled with magic metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chests of jewels in his store-house,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the wealth of Kalevala.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
