<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XXV: Wainamoinen’s Wedding-Songs</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Wainamoinen’s Wedding-Songs</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>At the home of Ilmarinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long had they been watching, waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the coming of the blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his bride from Sariola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary were the eyes of watchers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting from the father’s portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking from the mother’s windows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary were the young knees standing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the gates of the magician;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary grew the feet of children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tramping to the walls and watching;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worn and torn, the shoes of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Running on the shore to meet him.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now at last upon a morning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a lovely day in winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heard they from the woods the rumble</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of a snow-sledge swiftly bounding.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lakko, hostess of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She the lovely Kalew-daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words in great excitement:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“ ’Tis the sledge of the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comes at last the metal-worker</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the dismal Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his side the Bride of Beauty!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome, welcome, to this hamlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Welcome to thy mother’s hearth-stone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dwelling of thy father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By thine ancestors erected!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Straightway came great Ilmarinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his cottage drove the blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the fireside of his father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his mother’s ancient dwelling.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hazel-birds were sweetly singing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the newly-bended collar;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sweetly called the sacred cuckoos</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the summit of the break-board;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Merry, jumped the graceful squirrel</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the oaken shafts and cross-bar.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lakko, Kalew’s fairest hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beauteous daughter of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words of hearty welcome:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“For the new moon hopes the village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sun, the happy maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the boat, the swelling water;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have not the moon expected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sun have not been waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have waited for my hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waited for the Bride of Beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watched at morning, watched at evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not know but some misfortune,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Some sad fate had overtaken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bride and bridegroom on their journey;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought the maiden growing weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Weary of my son’s attentions,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since he faithfully had promised</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To return to Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere his foot-prints had departed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the snow-fields of his father.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Every morn I looked and listened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Constantly I thought and wondered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When his sledge would rumble homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When it would return triumphant</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his home, renowned and ancient.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had a blind and beggared straw-horse</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hobbled to these shores awaiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a sledge of but two pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well the steed would have been lauded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had it brought my son beloved,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Had it brought the Bride of Beauty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus I waited long, impatient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looking out from morn till even,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Watching with my head extended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my tresses streaming southward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my eyelids widely opened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waiting for my son’s returning</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this modest home of heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To this narrow place of resting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finally am I rewarded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the sledge has come triumphant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing home my son and hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his side the Rainbow maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Red her cheeks, her visage winsome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pride and joy of Sariola.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Wizard-bridegroom of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take thy courser to the stable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead him to the well-filled manger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the best of grain and clover;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give to us thy friendly greetings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Greetings send to all thy people.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thy greetings thou hast ended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then relate what has befallen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To our hero in his absence.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou gone without adventure</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dark fields of Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Searching for the Maid of Beauty?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst thou scale the hostile ramparts,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Didst thou take the virgin’s mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Passing o’er her mother’s threshold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Visiting the halls of Louhi?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“But I know without the asking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the answer to my question:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comest from the North a victor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy journey well contented;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast brought the Northland daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast razed the hostile portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast stormed the forts of Louhi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stormed the mighty walls opposing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy journey to Pohyola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the village of the father.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy care the bride is sitting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thine arms, the Rainbow-maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy side, the pride of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mated to the highly-gifted.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who has told the cruel story,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who the worst of news has scattered,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy suit was unsuccessful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That in vain thy steed had journeyed?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in vain has been thy wooing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not in vain thy steed has travelled</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the dismal homes of Lapland;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>He has journeyed heavy laden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shaken mane, and tail, and forelock,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dripping foam from lips and nostrils,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the bringing of the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the burden of the husband.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Come, thou beauty, from the snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come, descend thou from the cross-bench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not linger for assistance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not tarry to be carried;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If too young the one that lifts thee,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If too proud the one in waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rise thou, graceful, like a young bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hither glide along the pathway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the tan-bark scarlet-colored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the herds of kine have evened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the gentle lambs have trodden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Smoothened by the tails of horses.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Haste thou here with gentle footsteps,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the pathway smooth and tidy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the tiles of even surface,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On thy second father’s court-yard,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy second mother’s dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy brother’s place of resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy sister’s silent chambers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Place thy foot within these portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Step across this waiting threshold,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Enter thou these halls of joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath these painted rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath this roof of ages.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>During all the winter evenings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the summer gone forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sang the tiling made of ivory,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wishing thou wouldst walk upon it;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often sang the golden ceiling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping thou wouldst walk beneath it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the windows often whistled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Asking thee to sit beside them;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even on this merry morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even on the recent evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sat the aged at their windows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sea-shore ran the children,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the walls the maidens waited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ran the boys upon the highway,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to watch the young bride’s coming,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming with her hero-husband.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Hail, ye courtiers of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the heroes of the fathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail to thee, Wainola’s hamlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail, ye halls with heroes peopled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail, ye rooms with all your inmates,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail to thee, sweet golden moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail to thee, benignant Ukko,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hail companions of the bridegroom!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never has there been in Northland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a wedding-train of honor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never such a bride of beauty.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bridegroom, thou beloved hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now untie the scarlet ribbons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And remove the silken muffler,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us see the honey-maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the Daughter of the Rainbow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seven years hast thou been wooing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou brought the maid affianced,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hast thou sought a sweeter cuckoo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought one fairer than the moonlight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sought a mermaid from the ocean?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But I know without the asking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>See the answer to my question:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast brought the sweet-voiced cuckoo,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast found the swan of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Plucked the sweetest flower of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Culled the fairest of the jewels,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered Pohya’s sweetest berry!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Sat a babe upon the matting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the young child spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Brother, what is this thou bringest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Aspen-log or trunk of willow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slender as the mountain-linden?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bridegroom, well dost thou remember,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast hoped it all thy life-time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoped to bring the Maid of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou a thousand times hast said it,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better far than any other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not one like the croaking raven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the magpie from the border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the scarecrow from the corn-fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the vulture from the desert.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>What has this one done of credit,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the summer that has ended?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the gloves that she has knitted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the mittens she has woven?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast brought her empty-handed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a gift she brings thy father;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy chests the mice are nesting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long-tails feeding on thy vestments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And thy bride cannot repair them.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Lakko, hostess of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She the faithful Kalew-daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears the young child’s speech in wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Speaks these words of disapproval:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Silly prattler, cease thy talking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast spoken in dishonor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let all others be astonished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Heap thy malice on thy kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Must not harm the Bride of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rainbow-daughter of the Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>False indeed is this thy prattle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All thy words are full of evil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fallen from thy tongue of mischief,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the lips of one unworthy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excellent the hero’s young bride,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Best of all in Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the strawberry in summer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the daisy from the meadow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the cuckoo from the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the bluebird from the aspen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the redbreast from the heather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the martin from the linden;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never couldst thou find in Ehstland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a virgin as this daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a graceful beauteous maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such dignity of carriage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With such arms of pearly whiteness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With a neck so fair and lovely.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither is she empty-handed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She has brought us furs abundant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought us many silken garments,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Richest weavings of Pohyola.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many beauteous things the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the spindle has accomplished,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spun and woven with her fingers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dresses of the finest texture</span>
				<br/>
				<span>She in winter has upfolded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bleached them in the days of spring-time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dried them at the hour of noon-day,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our couches finest linen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our heads the softest pillows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our comfort woollen blankets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For our necks the silken ribbons.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the bride speaks gracious Lakko:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Goodly wife, thou Maid of Beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Highly wert thou praised as daughter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In thy father’s distant country;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here thou shalt be praised forever</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the kindred of thy husband;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou shalt never suffer sorrow,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never give thy heart to grieving;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the swamps thou wert not nurtured,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wert not fed beside the brooklets;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wert born ’neath stars auspicious,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nurtured from the richest garners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wert taken to the brewing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sweetest beer in Northland.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Beauteous bride from Sariola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shouldst thou see me bringing hither</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Casks of corn, or wheat, or barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bringing rye in great abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>They belong to this thy household;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good the plowing of thy husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good his sowing and his reaping.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Bride of Beauty from the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou wilt learn this home to manage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learn to labor with thy kindred;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good the home for thee to dwell in,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Good enough for bride and daughter.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At thy hand will rest the milk-pail,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the churn awaits thine order;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is well here for the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Happy will the young bride labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Easy are the resting-benches;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here the host is like thy father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like thy mother is the hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the sons are like thy brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like thy sisters are the daughters.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shouldst thou ever have a longing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the whiting of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy father’s Northland salmon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For thy brother’s hazel-chickens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ask them only of thy husband,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let thy hero-husband bring them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There is not in all of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a creature of the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a bird beneath the ether,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not a fish within the waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not the largest, nor the smallest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That thy husband cannot capture.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It is well here for the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here the bride may live in freedom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Need not turn the heavy millstone,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Need not move the iron pestle;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here the wheat is ground by water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the rye, the swifter current,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the billows wash the vessels</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the surging waters rinse them.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thou hast here a lovely village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Finest spot in all of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the lowlands sweet the verdure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the uplands, fields of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the lake-shore near the hamlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near thy home the running water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the goslings swim and frolic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Water-birds disport in numbers.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the bride and bridegroom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Were refreshed with richest viands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Given food and drink abundant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fed on choicest bits of reindeer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sweetest loaves of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the best of wheaten biscuits,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the richest beer of Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many things were on the table,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many dainties of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the bowls of scarlet color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the platters deftly painted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many cakes with honey sweetened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To each guest was butter given,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many bits of trout and whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Larger salmon carved in slices,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the knives of molten silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rimmed with gold the silver handles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beer of barley ceaseless flowing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey-drink that was not purchased,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cellar flows profusely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beer for all, the tongues to quicken,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mead and beer the minds to freshen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who is there to lead the singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lead the songs of Kalevala?</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal, wise enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quick begins his incantations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway sings the songs that follow.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Golden brethren, dearest kindred,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye, my loved ones, wise and worthy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ye companions, highly-gifted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Listen to my simple sayings:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rarely stand the geese together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sisters do not mate each other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not together stand the brothers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor the children of one mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the countries of the Northland.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Shall we now begin the singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing the songs of old tradition?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singers can but sing their wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the cuckoo call the spring-time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the goddess of the heavens</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only dyes the earth in beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>So the goddesses of weaving</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Can but weave from dawn till twilight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ever sing the youth of Lapland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their straw-shoes full of gladness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When the coarse-meat of the roebuck,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or of blue-moose they have eaten.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore should I not be singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the children not be chanting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the biscuits of Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the bread of Kalew-waters?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even sing the lads of Lapland</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their straw-shoes filled with joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drinking but a cup of water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eating but the bitter tan-bark.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore should I not be singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the children not be chanting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the beer of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brewed from barley in perfection,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dressed in quaint and homely costume,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As they sit beside their hearth-stones.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore should I not be singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the children too be chanting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath these painted rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In these halls renowned and ancient?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the place for men to linger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the court-room for the maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near the foaming beer of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Honey-brewed in great abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Very near, the salmon-waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Near, the nets for trout and whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here where food is never wanting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the beer is ever brewing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Wainola’s sons assemble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here Wainola’s daughters gather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here they never eat in trouble,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here they live without regretting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the life-time of the landlord,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the hostess lives and prospers.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Who shall first be sung and lauded?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall it be the bride or bridegroom?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us praise the bridegroom’s father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the hero-host be chanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him whose home is in the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him who built upon the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Him who brought the trunks of lindens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With their tops and slender branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought them to the best of places,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Joined them skilfully together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the mansion of the nation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For this famous hero-dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walls procured upon the lowlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rafters from the pine and fir-tree,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the woodlands beams of oak-wood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the berry-plains the studding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bark was furnished by the aspen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the mosses from the fenlands.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trimly builded is this mansion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In a haven warmly sheltered;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here a hundred men have labored,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the roof have stood a thousand,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As this spacious house was building,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As this roof was tightly jointed.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Here the ancient mansion-builder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When these rafters were erected,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost in storms his locks of sable,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scattered by the winds of heaven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often has the hero-landlord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rocks his gloves forgotten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left his hat upon the willows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lost his mittens in the marshes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oftentimes the mansion-builder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the early hours of morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere his workmen had awakened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unperceived by all the village,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has arisen from his slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Left his cabin the snow-fields,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Combed his locks among the branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bathed his eyes in dews of morning.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Thus obtained the pleasant landlord</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Friends to fill his spacious dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill his benches with magicians,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill his windows with enchanters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill his halls with wizard-singers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill his floors with ancient speakers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill his ancient court with strangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fill his hurdles with the needy;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the Kalew-host is lauded.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now I praise the genial hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Who prepares the toothsome dinner,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fills with plenty all her tables,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bakes the honeyed loaves of barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Kneads the dough with magic fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With her arms of strength and beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bakes her bread in copper ovens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeds her guests and bids them welcome,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feeds them on the toothsome bacon,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the trout, and pike, and whiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rarest fish in ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the dainties of Wainola.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Often has the faithful hostess</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Risen from her couch in silence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the crowing of the watcher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To prepare the wedding-banquet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make her tables look attractive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brew the honey-beer of wedlock.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Excellently has the housewife,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has the hostess filled with wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brewed the beer from hops and barley,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the corn of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the wheat-malt honey-seasoned,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stirred the beer with graceful fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the oven in the penthouse,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the chamber swept and polished.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither did the prudent hostess,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful, and full of wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let the barley sprout too freely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the beer should taste of black-earth,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be too bitter in the brewing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often went she to the garners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went alone at hour of midnight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was not frightened by the black-wolf,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not fear the beasts of woodlands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now the hostess I have lauded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me praise the favored suitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the honored hero-bridegroom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Best of all the village-masters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Clothed in purple is the hero,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Raiment brought from distant nations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tightly fitting to his body;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Snugly sets his coat of ermine,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the floor it hangs in beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trailing from his neck and shoulders,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Little of his vest appearing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Peeping through his outer raiment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woven by the Moon’s fair daughters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his vestment silver-tinselled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dressed in neatness is the suitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Round his waist a belt of copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hammered by the Sun’s sweet maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the early fires were lighted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ere the fire had been discovered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dressed in richness is the bridegroom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his feet are silken stockings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silken ribbons on his ankles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold and silver interwoven.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dressed in beauty is the bridegroom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his feet are shoes of deer-skin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the swans upon the water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the blue-duck on the sea-waves,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the thrush among the willows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the water-birds of Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Well adorned the hero-suitor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his locks of golden color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With his gold-beard finely braided,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hero-hat upon his forehead,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Piercing through the forest branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Reaching to the clouds of heaven,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bought with countless gold and silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Priceless is the suitor’s head-gear.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now the bridegroom has been lauded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I will praise the young bride’s playmate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Day-companion in her childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the maiden’s magic mansion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whence was brought the merry maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the village of Tanikka?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence was never brought the playmate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playmate of the bride in childhood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Has she come from distant nations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the waters of the Dwina,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the ocean far-outstretching?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not from Dwina came the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not sail across the waters;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Grew as berry in the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a strawberry of sweetness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the fields the child of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the glens the golden flower.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence has come the young bride’s playmate,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence arose her fair companion.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tiny are her feet and fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Small her lips of scarlet color,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the maiden’s loom of Suomi;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes that shine in kindly beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the twinkling stars of heaven;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beam the playmate’s throbbing temples</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the moonlight on the waters.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trinkets has the bride’s companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her neck a golden necklace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In her tresses, silken ribbons,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On her arms are golden bracelets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden rings upon her fingers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Pearls are set in golden ear-rings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Loops of gold upon her temples,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And with pearls her brow is studded.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland thought the Moon was shining</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When her jeweled ear-rings glistened;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought the Sun had left his station</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When her girdle shone in beauty;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thought a ship was homeward sailing</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When her colored head-gear fluttered.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus is praised the bride’s companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Playmate of the Rainbow-maiden.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>“Now I praise the friends assembled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All appear in graceful manners;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>If the old are wise and silent,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the youth are free and merry,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the guests are fair and worthy.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never was there in Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never will there be in Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Such a company assembled;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the children speak in joyance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the aged move sedately;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Dressed in white are all the maidens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the hoar-frost of the morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the welcome dawn of spring-time,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the rising of the daylight.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver then was more abundant,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gold among the guests in plenty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the hills were money-pockets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Money-bags along the valleys,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the friends that were invited,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the guests in joy assembled.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the friends have now been lauded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Each has gained his meed of honor.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Song-deliverer of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Swung himself upon the fur-bench</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his magic sledge of copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway hastened to his hamlet,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing as he journeyed onward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing charms and incantations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing one day, then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the third day chanting legends.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the rocks the runners rattled,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung the sledge upon a birch-stump,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Broke it into many pieces,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the magic of his singing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Double were the runners bended,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All the parts were torn asunder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And his magic sledge was ruined.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Then the good, old Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words in meditation:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Is there one among this number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this rising generation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or perchance among the aged,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the passing generation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That will go to Mana’s kingdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the empire of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There to get the magic auger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the master of Manala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I may repair my snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or a second sledge may fashion?”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>What the younger people answered</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Was the answer of the aged:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not among the youth of Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nor among the aged heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Is there one of ample courage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That has bravery sufficient,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To attempt the reckless journey</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the kingdom of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To Manala’s fields and castles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thence to bring Tuoni’s auger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewithal to mend thy snow-sledge,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Build anew thy sledge of magic.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The eternal wisdom-singer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Went again to Mana’s empire,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the kingdom of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Crossed the sable stream of Deathland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the castles of Manala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Found the auger of Tuoni,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brought the instrument in safety.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Straightway sings old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings to life a purple forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the forest, slender birches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And beside them, mighty oak-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shapes them into shafts and runners,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moulds them by his will and power,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes anew his sledge of magic.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>On his steed he lays the harness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Binds him to his sledge securely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seats himself upon the cross-bench,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the racer gallops homeward,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the manger filled and waiting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the stable of his master;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings the ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Famous bard and wise enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the threshold of his dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his home in Kalevala.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
