<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Rune XXXVII: Ilmarinen’s Bride of Gold</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-37" epub:type="chapter z3998:poem">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Rune</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXXVII</span>
				</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Ilmarinen’s Bride of Gold</h3>
			</hgroup>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, metal-worker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept the third from morn till evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the death of his companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Once the Maiden of the Rainbow;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not swing his heavy hammer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Did not touch its copper handle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made no sound within his smithy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Made no blow upon his anvil,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Till three months had circled over;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the blacksmith spake as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Woe is me, unhappy hero!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do not know how I can prosper;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long the days, and cold, and dreary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Longer still the nights, and colder;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am weary in the evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the morning still am weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no longing for the morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the evening is unwelcome;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Have no pleasure in the future,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All my pleasures gone forever,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With my faithful life-companion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Slaughtered by the hand of witchcraft!</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often will my heart-strings quiver</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I rest within my chamber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When I wake at dreamy midnight,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Half-unconscious, vainly searching</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For my noble wife departed.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wifeless lived the mourning blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Altered in his form and features;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept one month and then another,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wept three months in full succession.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the magic metal-worker</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered gold from deeps of ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered silver from the mountains,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered many heaps of birch-wood.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Filled with faggots thirty sledges,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Burned the birch-wood into ashes;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Put the ashes in the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid the gold upon the embers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lengthwise laid a piece of silver</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the size of lambs in autumn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Or the fleet-foot hare in winter;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Places servants at the bellows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to melt the magic metals.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eagerly the servants labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gloveless, hatless, do the workmen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fan the flames within the furnace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, magic blacksmith,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Works unceasing at his forging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to mould a golden image,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Mould a bride from gold and silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the workmen fail their master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faithless stand they at the bellows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Now the artist, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fans the flame with force of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows the third from morn till even;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he looks within the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks around the oven-border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping there to see an image</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rising from the molten metals.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Comes a lambkin from the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rising from the fire of magic,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wearing hair of gold and copper,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laced with many threads of silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All rejoice but Ilmarinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the beauty of the image.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the language of the blacksmith:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“May the wolf admire thy graces;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I desire a bride of beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born from molten gold and silver!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the furnace threw the lambkin;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Added gold in great abundance,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And increased the mass of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Added other magic metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Set the workmen at the bellows;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Zealously the servants labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gloveless, hatless, do the workmen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fan the flames within the furnace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, wizard-forgeman,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Works unceasing with his metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moulding well a golden image,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wife of molten gold and silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the workmen fail their master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faithless do they ply the bellows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the artist, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fans the flames by force of magic;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows a third from morn till evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When he looks within the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks around the oven-border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoping there to see an image</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rising from the molten metals.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the flames a colt arises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden-maned and silver-headed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hoofs are formed of shining copper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All rejoice but Ilmarinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the wonderful creation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This the language of the blacksmith:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Let the bears admire thy graces;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I desire a bride of beauty</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born of many magic metals.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon the wonder-forger</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drives the colt back to the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Adds a greater mass of silver,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And of gold the rightful measure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sets the workmen at the bellows.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eagerly the servants labor,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gloveless, hatless, do the workmen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fan the flames within the furnace.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, the magician,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Works unceasing at his witchcraft,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moulding well a golden maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bride of molten gold and silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the workmen fail their master,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Faithlessly they ply the bellows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Now the blacksmith, Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fans the flames with magic powers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows one day, and then a second,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blows a third from morn till even;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then he looks within his furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looks around the oven-border,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Trusting there to see a maiden</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Coming from the molten metals.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the fire a virgin rises,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Golden-haired and silver-headed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful in form and feature.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>All are filled with awe and wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the artist and magician.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen, metal-worker,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forges nights and days unceasing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the bride of his creation;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Feet he forges for the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hands and arms, of gold and silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her feet are not for walking,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither can her arms embrace him.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ears he forges for the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But her ears are not for hearing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forges her a mouth of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Eyes he forges bright and sparkling;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But the magic mouth is speechless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the eyes are not for seeing.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“This, indeed, a priceless maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could she only speak in wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Could she breathe the breath of Ukko!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thereupon he lays the virgin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his silken couch of slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his downy place of resting.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen heats his bath-room,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Makes it ready for his service,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Binds together silken brushes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brings three cans of crystal water,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherewithal to lave the image,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lave the golden maid of beauty.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When this task had been completed,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ilmarinen, hoping, trusting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid his golden bride to slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On his downy couch of resting;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ordered many silken wrappings,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ordered bear-skins, three in number,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ordered seven lambs-wool blankets,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus to keep him warm in slumber,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sleeping by the golden image</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Re had forged from magic metals.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Warm the side of Ilmarinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That was wrapped in furs and blankets;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chill the parts beside the maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By his bride of gold and silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>One side warm, the other lifeless,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Turning into ice from coldness.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the artist, Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Not for me was born this virgin</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the magic molten metals;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall take her to Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Give her to old Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a bride and life-companion,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Comfort to him in his dotage.”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Ilmarinen, much disheartened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Takes the virgin to Wainola,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the plains of Kalevala,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To his brother speaks as follows:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“O, thou ancient Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Look with favor on this image;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Make the maiden fair and lovely,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Beautiful in form and feature,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Suited to thy years declining!”</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Wainamoinen, old and truthful,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Looked in wonder on the virgin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the golden bride of beauty,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words to Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore dost thou bring this maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wherefore bring to Wainamoinen</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bride of molten gold and silver?”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake in answer Ilmarinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Wherefore should I bring this image,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>But for purposes the noblest?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have brought her as companion</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To thy life in years declining,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a joy and consolation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When thy days are full of trouble!”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake the good, old Wainamoinen:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Magic brother, wonder-forger,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Throw the virgin to the furnace,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the flames, thy golden image,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Forge from her a thousand trinkets.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take the image into Ehstland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Take her to the plains of Pohya,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That for her the mighty powers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>May engage in deadly contest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Worthy trophy for the victor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Not for me this bride of wonder,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Neither for my worthy people.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I shall never wed an image</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born from many magic metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never wed a silver maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never wed a golden virgin.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Then the hero of the waters</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Called together all his people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Spake these words of ancient wisdom:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Every child of Northland, listen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whether poor, or fortune-favored:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never bow before an image</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born of molten gold and silver;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never while the sunlight brightens,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never while the moonlight glimmers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose a maiden of the metals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Choose a bride from gold created;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold the lips of golden maiden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Silver breathes the breath of sorrow.”</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
