<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Epilogue</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="epilogue" epub:type="epilogue z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Epilogue</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Now I end my measured singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bid my weary tongue keep silence,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Leave my songs to other singers.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Horses have their times of resting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After many hours of labor;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Even sickles will grow weary</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When they have been long at reaping;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waters seek a quiet haven</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After running long in rivers;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Fire subsides and sinks in slumber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the dawning of the morning;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Therefore I should end my singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As my song is growing weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the pleasure of the evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the joy of morn arising.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Often I have heard it chanted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often heard the words repeated:</span>
				<br/>
				<span>“Worthy cataracts and rivers</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never empty all their waters.”</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Thus the wise and worthy singer</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sings not all his garnered wisdom;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Better leave unsung some sayings</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Than to sing them out of season.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Thus beginning, and thus ending,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Do I roll up all my legends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Roll them in a ball for safety,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my memory arrange them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In their narrow place of resting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest the songs escape unheeded,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the lock is still unopened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>While the teeth remain unparted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the weary tongue is silent.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Why should I sing other legends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chant them in the glen and forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sing them on the hill and heather?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cold and still my golden mother</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lies beneath the meadow, sleeping,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hears my ancient songs no longer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Cannot listen to my singing;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Only will the forest listen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sacred birches, sighing pine-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Junipers endowed with kindness,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Alder-trees that love to bear me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>With the aspens and the willows.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>When my loving mother left me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Young was I, and low of stature;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the cuckoo of the forest,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the thrush upon the heather,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Like the lark I learned to twitter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned to sing my simple measures,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Guided by a second mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Stern and cold, without affection;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Drove me helpless from my chamber</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the wind-side of her dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the north-side of her cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where the chilling winds in mercy</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Carried off the unprotected.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>As a lark I learned to wander,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Wander as a lonely song-bird,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the forests and the fenlands,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Quietly o’er hill and heather;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Walked in pain about the marshes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned the songs of winds and waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Learned the music of the ocean,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the echoes of the woodlands.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Many men that live to murmur,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many women live to censure,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many speak with evil motives;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many they with wretched voices</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Curse me for my wretched singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blame my tongue for speaking wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Call my ancient songs unworthy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blame the songs and curse the singer.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Be not thus, my worthy people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blame me not for singing badly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Unpretending as a minstrel.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I have never had the teaching,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never lived with ancient heroes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never learned the tongues of strangers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Never claimed to know much wisdom.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Others have had language-masters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Nature was my only teacher,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Woods and waters my instructors.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Homeless, friendless, lone, and needy,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Save in childhood with my mother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When beneath her painted rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Where she twirled the flying spindle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the work-bench of my brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By the window of my sister,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the cabin of my father,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my early days of childhood.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Be this as it may, my people,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>This may point the way to others,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the singers better gifted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the good of future ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the coming generations,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the rising folk of Suomi.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
