<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Proem</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="proem" epub:type="prologue z3998:poem">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Proem</h2>
			<p>
				<span>Mastered by desire impulsive,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By a mighty inward urging,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>I am ready now for singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Ready to begin the chanting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of our nation’s ancient folk-song</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Handed down from by-gone ages.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my mouth the words are melting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my lips the tones are gliding,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From my tongue they wish to hasten;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my willing teeth are parted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When my ready mouth is opened,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Songs of ancient wit and wisdom</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hasten from me not unwilling.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Golden friend, and dearest brother,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Brother dear of mine in childhood,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and sing with me the stories,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come and chant with me the legends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Legends of the times forgotten,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Since we now are here together,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Come together from our roamings.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seldom do we come for singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Seldom to the one, the other,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er this cold and cruel country,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>O’er the poor soil of the Northland.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let us clasp our hands together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That we thus may best remember.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Join we now in merry singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Chant we now the oldest folk-lore,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the dear ones all may hear them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the well-inclined may hear them,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this rising generation.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These are words in childhood taught me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Songs preserved from distant ages,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Legends they that once were taken</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the belt of Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the forge of Ilmarinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the sword of Kaukomieli,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the bow of Youkahainen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the pastures of the Northland,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the meads of Kalevala.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These my dear old father sang me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When at work with knife and hatchet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These my tender mother taught me</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When she twirled the flying spindle,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>When a child upon the matting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>By her feet I rolled and tumbled.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Incantations were not wanting</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over Sampo and o’er Louhi,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sampo growing old in singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Louhi ceasing her enchantment.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In the songs died wise Wipunen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>At the games died Lemminkainen.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>There are many other legends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Incantations that were taught me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That I found along the wayside,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Gathered in the fragrant copses,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Blown me from the forest branches,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Culled among the plumes of pine-trees,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Scented from the vines and flowers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Whispered to me as I followed</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Flocks in land of honeyed meadows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Over hillocks green and golden,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>After sable-haired Murikki,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>And the many-colored Kimmo.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many runes the cold has told me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many lays the rain has brought me,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Other songs the winds have sung me;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Many birds from many forests,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft have sung me lays in concord;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Waves of sea, and ocean billows,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Music from the many waters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Music from the whole creation,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Oft have been my guide and master.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Sentences the trees created,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Rolled together into bundles,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Moved them to my ancient dwelling,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>On the sledges to my cottage,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Tied them to my garret rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Hung them on my dwelling-portals,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Laid them in a chest of boxes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boxes lined with shining copper.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Long they lay within my dwelling</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Through the chilling winds of winter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In my dwelling-place for ages.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Shall I bring these songs together</span>
				<br/>
				<span>From the cold and frost collect them?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I bring this nest of boxes,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Keepers of these golden legends,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the table in my cabin,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Underneath the painted rafters,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>In this house renowned and ancient?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I now these boxes open,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Boxes filled with wondrous stories?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Shall I now the end unfasten</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of this ball of ancient wisdom,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>These ancestral lays unravel?</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Let me sing an old-time legend,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That shall echo forth the praises</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the beer that I have tasted,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the sparkling beer of barley.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring to me a foaming goblet</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of the barley of my fathers,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Lest my singing grow too weary,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singing from the water only.</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Bring me too a cup of strong-beer,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>It will add to our enchantment,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>To the pleasure of the evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Northland’s long and dreary evening,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the beauty of the day-dawn,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>For the pleasure of the morning,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The beginning of the new-day.</span>
			</p>
			<p>
				<span>Often I have heard them chanting,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Often I have heard them singing,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the nights come to us singly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the Moon beams on us singly,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>That the Sun shines on us singly;</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Singly also, Wainamoinen,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>The renowned and wise enchanter,</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Born from everlasting Ether</span>
				<br/>
				<span>Of his mother, Ether’s daughter.</span>
			</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
